ASEMIC 
~e ArtC> ~itt1) 
Peter Schwenger 
[1] NE '= 
so 
TA 
University of Minnesota Press 
Minneapolis I London 
Parts of chapter 2 were originally published as • Enigmatic Epistolarity: Twombly's Letter of 
Resignation/, Mosaic: CIII ill terdisciplillllry criticlil jOllrllll150, no. 3 (2017): 73-89. 
Copyright 2019 by the Regents of the University of Minnesota 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced. stored in a retrieval system, 
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording. 
or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the publisher. 
Published by the University of Minnesota Press 
III TIlird Avenue South, Suite 290 
Minneapolis, MN 55401-2520 
http://www.upress.u mn.edu 
Printed in the United States of America on acid-free paper 
The University of Minnesota is an equal-opportunity educator and employer. 
26 2S 24 23 22 21 20 19 
Library of Congress Cat;tloging-in-Publication Data 
Names: Schwenger, Peter, author. 
Title: :\semic : the art of writing / Peter Schwcnger. 
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 
Description: M inncapolis : Un ivcrsit)· of M i nnesola Press, 20 19. I Includes bibliographical references and index. I 
Identifiers: LCCN 2019006711 (print) I ISBN 978-1·5179·0696·2, (he) I ISBN 978-1-5179·069i·9 (pb) 
Subjects: LCSH: Visuali?;ation. 
Classification: LCC BF367 .S39 2019 (print) I DOC 153.3/2-dc23 
LC record available at hltps:! Ilccn.loc.gov/20l90067 1 1 


All artworks are writing, not just those that are obviously 
suchj they are hieroglyphs for which the code has been 
lost, a loss that plays into their content. 
Theodor Adorno, Aesthetic Theory 
8/arif 
CHAPTER 1 
What Asemic Writing Is, and Why 
CHAPTER 2 
Three Asemic Ancestors 
Henri Michaux, Roland Barthes, and Cy Twombly 
CHAPTER 3 
Traces 
CHAPTER 4 
Three for Today 
Michael Jacobson, Rosaire Appel, and Christopher Skinner 
CHAPTERS 
Reading Asemic 
Online Resources for Asemic Writing 
Acknowledgments 
Notes 
Bibliography 
Index 
CONTENTS 
19 
61 
101 
137 
151 
153 
155 
161 
171 
'.. . . 
. -
ch~~r 1 
WHAT ASEMIC WRITING IS, 
AND WHY 
Asemic writing existed long before there was a name for it. It was given that 
name by two visual poets, Tim Gaze and Jim Leftwich, who adopted a term 
that had already been used, on occasion, to describe certain aspects of language. Asemic appears (in French as well as in translation) in Roland Barthes's 
The Rustle of Language and in Jacques Derrida's Dissemination. Barthes applies the term to a word produced by a typographical mistake-for instance, 
offiver instead of officer (323). The result is a "pure signifier" that, free of any 
preordained Signification, is released into "effiorescence." Derrida describes the 
"supplementary mark of the blank" between words as "asemic spacing" (258); 
it makes signification possible, without in itself Signifying. Gaze and Leftwich, 
however, seem to have gravitated to this word quite independently, for reasons 
that Leftwich explains in a letter to Gaze written onJanuary 27, 1998: 
A seme is a unit of meaning, or the smallest unit of meaning (also 
known as a sememe, analogous with phoneme). An asemic text, then, 
might be involved with units oflanguage for reasons other than that 
of producing meaning. As such, the asemic text would seem to be an 
ideal, an impossibility, but possibly worth pursuing for just that reason. 
(Asemic Writing 3) 
When the linguistic term seme (derived from the Greek serna) "sign") is preceded by the privative a-} the normal meaning of what follows is negated or 
neutralized (compare moral and amoral). In the case of asemic it is meaning 
itself, or rather the sign's capacity to convey meaning, that is eliminated. So 
asemic writing is writing that does not attempt to communicate any message 
other than its own nature as writing. It is, in the words of Michael Jacobson, 
2 What Asemic Writing Is 
"a shadow, impression, and abstraction of conventional writing" ("On Asemic 
Writing"). This distinguishes it from nonsense or gobbledygook or whatever 
may be produced by those emblematic monkeys whaling away at typewriters. 
In all of those cases we have before our eyes, if not a coherent message, at least 
a coherent sign system. We can recognize the letters on the page as signs that 
we are familiar with, even if they are not employed to form known words for 
communicative purposes. Asemic writing removes even this minimal reassurance. The signs before our eyes don't belong to any familiar system. At the same 
time, they put themselves forward in the form of a sign system, recognizable as 
marks disposed on a page according to certain conventions. Those marks often 
hint at systems that are more comprehensible, such as Chinese characters, 
Islamic calligraph)'J or Paleolithic pictographs. At its simplest, asemic writing is, 
according to Gaze, "anything which looks like writing, but in which the person 
viewing can't read any words" (Asemic Movement 1). By this definition terrible 
handwriting would qualify, and indeed Gaze would go along with this. Even if 
it is not intended as a piece of asemic writing, an illegible scrawl may produce 
an asemic effect in viewers, replacing the expected message with an unexpected 
focus on the material configurations of the markings on the page.l Faced with 
signs that encourage us to read them at the same time that they systematically 
frustrate our reading, we may find ourselves replicating what psychiatry calls 
asemia-a condition in which the patient is unable to use or understand communicative symbols. 
Gaze and Leftwich coined the term asemic because, suddenly, there was 
a need for it. Near the end of the 1990s, hundreds of artists began to produce asemic writing, self-publishing and influencing each other through the 
Internet. What emerged from these alliances was not a general consensus, an 
artistic practice governed by conventions that might be as constraining as those 
that govern writing itself. Rather, uncoupled from its communicative function, 
asemic writing exploded into an exuberant variety. Merely paging through the 
illustrations in this book will give you some idea of that variety, and this can be 
supplemented by the torrent of images now on the web. The delirium of styles 
that is asemic writing is perhaps best captured by James Joyce in seven breakneck pages of Finnegans Wake cataloging the cacophonies of antique manuscripts, such as "those indignant whiplooplashes; those so prudently bolted or 
blocked rounds; the touching reminiscence of an incompletet trail or dropped 
What Asemic Writing Is 3 
final; a round thousand whirligig glorioles, prefaced by (alas!) now illegible 
airy plumeflights" (119). And yet: "it is not a misetfectual whyacinthinous riot 
of blots and blurs and bars and balls and hoops and wriggles and juxtaposed 
jottings linked by spurts of speed: it only looks as like it as damn it" (118). 
Asemic writing may look "miseffectual" because illegible; but it has effects that 
are different from those of conventional communicative writing. It is the aim of 
this book to explore that difference. 
The timing of this liberatory movement is significant, for it comes at a point 
of crisis for writing, understood as material and handwritten. Writing today is 
almost invariably done by keyboarding rather than by an instrument moving 
across a blank paper surface. That familiar act was always perhaps more strange 
than we took the time to realize; and now it has once again become alien to 
many. The decline of cursive writing in the West is a fact. New national teaching 
standards adopted by forty-six U.S. states require proficiency in computer keyboarding by the fourth grade; however, cursive writing ability is not mentioned 
and is no longer a requirement. Even when teachers take up the option to teach 
cursive, a generation for whom keyboarding has become second nature is unlikely to adopt it. One index of the state of things is the SAT, the standardized 
test that thousands of U.S. high school seniors take every year. In 2005 the administrating board for the test mandated a handwritten essay; a check in 2007 
showed that 85 percent of high school students printed their essays (Breens). 
My bank manager says that most of her younger clients print their signatures 
on mortgage and loan applications, and that this is now acceptable. 
The decline of cursive was brought into prominence for many during the 
2013 trial of George Zimmerman for the shooting of Trayvon Martin. Witness 
Rachel Jeantel, a black nineteen-year-old friend of Martin, was asked to read 
aloud a letter that she had dictated to a friend, in which she described to 
Martin's parents what she heard while on the phone with him. When she said 
she could not read the letter, the defense attorney asked her, "Are you able 
to read at all?" "Some but not all," she responded. "I don't read cursive:' This 
"cringe-worthy moment" added another controversy to the already controversial trial, as Jeantel was subjected to a trial of her own.2 How could a high school 
student be so illiterate? But of course an inability to read cursive is not the same 
thing as illiteracy-this is to blur the very distinction that Jeantel herself had 
4 What Asemlc Writing 15 
made. Moreover, Jeantel was hardly an exception among those in her age group. 
For them, cursive writing is already in effect asemic. 
Of course there is pushback, arising out of concern that we are raising a 
generation of handwriting illiterates. If we can no longer read handwriting, 
critics object, how will students be able to read historical documents like the 
Declaration ofIndependence?-to which it is not unfair to ask when you last 
read the Declaration of Independence in any form, let alone in its eighteenthcentury script. More disturbing would be the inability to make out the writing 
of one's grandparents, in love letters or letters from the front. An inability to 
write cursive can also be a disadvantage in less obvious areas, like cake decorating. Beyond the purely practical, arguments are often made that the physicality of cursive letter formation creates an intimate bond between the writer and 
the words written; that cursive requires a greater attentiveness and therefore 
retention; and that it develops areas of the brain that would otherwise lie fallow (Konnikova). For such reasons, bills to make training in cursive a mandatory part of the school curriculum have been approved in North Carolina, 
California, Massachusetts, and Georgia. The physical skills of writing by hand 
may be disappearing, but they do not go gently, no matter how widespread 
other forms of writing may become. Indeed, for Roland Barthes such "other 
forms" do not really qualify as writing: 
What constitutes writing, ultimately, is not the sign (analytic abstraction), but, much more paradoxically, the cursivity of the discontinuous 
(what is repeated is necessarily discontinuous). Make a loop: you 
produce a sign; but shift it forward, your hand still resting there on the 
receptive surface; you generate a writing: writing is the hand which 
bears down and advances or hangs back, always in the same direction. 
("Requichot" 219) 
The forward impetus in writing that Barthes emphasizes here reflects a progressive unfolding of the writer's thought; it also produces and defines that 
thought. Now, however, familiar forms of thought are thrown into question 
as the material forms of writing that embodied them are abandoned. To think 
through the broader consequences of this change is the task taken on by the 
self-described "communicologist" Vilem Flusser. 
What Asemic Writing Is 5 
Plusser's consideration of writing-and not just cursive writing-is most 
fully carried out in his book Does Writing Have a Future? The answer to the 
question that his title poses is no: writing does not have a future. For Flusser, 
a self-confessed writing addict, this is not a cause for rejoicing. "There are 
people," he says, "and I count myself among them, who believe that they could 
not live without writing" (3). To be sure, "wTiting will persist, like a useless 
appendix" (122), because it is an ingrained habit. However, it is no longer an 
essential component of the future. Rather, the future is a matter of moving 
"into the universe of technical images," to use the title of a companion book 
by Flusser. He is not alone in identifying this pivotal moment. Andre LeroiGourhan asserts that "writing is probably doomed to disappear rapidly" and 
that this is a new "liberation" (404). Brian Rotman similarly asserts that "the 
regime of the alphabet ... appears to be drawing to a dose" (4). So, according 
to Flusser, writing has now begun to take on a certain strangeness: "This is the 
way lines of letters look in their final stage: ... torn rags of lines with gaping 
holes in between" (Does Writing Have a Future? 136). Such strangeness, he says, 
emerges whenever media that are being left behind are stripped of their covering of habit. 
As it always happens with phenomena covered by habit and more than 
habit, writing becomes almost mysterious, if we discover it by deliberate consideration. Ifwe draw off the cover of habit and more than habit, 
which renders writing an obvious gesture, taken at face value, it becomes a gesture of such complexity that it defies description. ("Gesture 
of Writing" 2) 
To the degree that we have been immersed in cursive, it has been largely invisible to us by dint of its familiarity. We didn't really see writing, for with a few 
exceptions (calligraphy or really bad handwriting) we tended not to look at it 
but to look through it. It was rendered translucent, if not transparent, by the 
urge that propels any viewer of writing beyond the graphic fact to the concept 
that it is supposed to convey. Writing is considered a "transcription" of something else; and that something else is always more important than the writing 
itself, which serves as a mere secretary to an executive meaning. Only now, as 
we leave cursive behind, are we beginning to question what it was all along. 
6 What Asemic Writing Is 
This is a textbook case of Marshall McLuhan's notion that "we look at the present through a rear-view mirror. We march backwards into the future" (73-74). 
Flusser's value is not that he prophesies the supplanting of books by computers, as others have done, but that he analyzes so perceptively the consequences 
of both the old and the new media. For Flusser, the shift away from writing 
has, most importantly, consequences for thought for the ways in which we are 
programmed to think and what counts as thought. 
The thought that precedes writing, Flusser observes, is very different 
from what it becomes on the page. The writing process begins when thoughts 
"begin to take a very nebulous shape within me" ("Gesture of Writing" 10). 
To write means to translate this nebulous and open-ended shape into a fixed 
line: "Writing is about setting ideas in lines, for unwritten ideas, left to their 
own devices, run in circles" (Does Writing Have a Future? 6). Only in a linear 
formulation is thought recognized as such; what precedes those lettered lines 
has generally been called by other, less prestigious names: rumination, free association, musing, reverie, and so forth. Now, contends Flusser, all of this is 
about to change with media-film, TV, computer screens-that are defined 
not by line but by surface. 
The fact that writing is set out in lines has carried with it an implicit epistemology: "Lines represent the world by projecting it as a series of successions, 
in the form of a process. Western thought is 'historical' in the sense that it conceives the world in lines, therefore as process" ("Line and Surface" 21 ).3 That 
process is additive: the reader of a text follows a series of parts that culminate 
in a synthesis. A surface medium like painting reverses that process: the synthesis is present at first sight, and then the viewer traces analytically the various parts of the painting. Up until now, the textual notion of thought has been 
predominant: 
For us, thinking was, and still is, a process that moves forward, that frees 
itself from images, from representations, that criticizes them, thereby 
becoming increasingly conceptual. We have the alphabet to thank for 
this understanding of thought and this understanding of thought to 
thank for the alphabet. (Does Writing Have a Future? 144-45) 
Now, Flusser suggests, "it may be that what is happening at present is the attempt to incorporate linear thought into surface thought" ("Line and Surface" 
What Asemic Writing Is 7 
29); an example would be film, with its narrative line incorporated into a series 
of moving images. But surface media can embody not only narrative lines but 
also concepts, the very concepts that have traditionally been the end product 
of a linear sequence: 
In the future, the situation may become thus: Imaginal thought will be 
a translation from concept into image, and conceptual thought a translation from image to concept. ... First there will be an image of something, then there will be an explanation of that image, and then there 
will be an image of that explanation. ("Line and Surface" 30) 
This rather abstract futurology is exemplified in asemic writing. Traditional writing is already an image, even if we tend not to recognize it as such. To see it as 
marks on a surface, it is necessary to detach it from meaning. This is done by 
bafiling any attempt to read the writing, that is, to follow its lines in the conventional way. Asemic writing replaces the familiar signs of the alphabet with its own 
enigmatic signs. Yet most asemic writing preserves the linear organization of conventional writing. The result is a kind of cognitive dissonance: writing is evoked 
at the same time that we are estranged from it. This strategy does not provide an 
"explanation" but rather something that calls for explanation-that is, a stimulus 
to thought. A bit further on in "Line and Surface" Flusser puts it like this: 
Imaginal thought is becoming capable of thinking about concepts. It can 
transform a concept into its "object;' and can therefore become a metathought of conceptual thinking .... Now, imaginal thought can begin 
thinking about concepts in the form of surface models. (30) 
Asemic writing is an example of such surface models: it implicitly asks us to 
conceptualize what we are seeing-not reading. It frees us from the structuration of lines of thought, even as we see before us those very lines of thought. 
The markings we see represent thought processes but are without content. 
Severed from "instrumentality," as Barthes would call it, they owe allegiance 
to nothing other than their own contours and the abstract idea of writing that 
they evoke. Images, which before were something to be superseded by concepts in the accepted linear-verbal mode, now offer themselves for a very different purpose. Through imagination, Flusser claims, we are now able to objectify 
8 What Asemic Writing Is 
concepts and thus free ourselves from them ("Line and Surface" 32). Foremost 
among such concepts must be the written materiality that has both expressed 
and defined the very idea of a "concept:' This, then, is an important aspect of 
the current phenomenon of asemic writing. 
The link between Plusser's ideas and asemic writing (which was not yet 
called that in his lifetime) is confirmed by his long relationship with Mira 
Schendel, an artist who shared many of his concerns and incorporated them 
into her work (Figure 1.1). Not all of that work is, strictly speaking, asemic, 
but in various ways it repeatedly questions our acceptance of textual modes 
of thinking. Schendel and Flusser met in Sao Paulo, Brazil, to which both had 
immigrated during the rise of Fascism in Europe. It was a stormy relationship, 
largely due to Schendel's demanding intensity. Nevertheless, Flusser was very 
fond of her personally, respected the great artist in her, and valued their ongoing conversations. In a memoir about her, he writes: 
Our dialogues affected Mira's work (as they did mine, I hasten to add). 
And Mira's work was the topic of the dialogue. That was the productive 
thing about our relationship: for Mira, I am a genuine critic: I influence 
her work. And she presents me with genuine issues that need to be 
thought and worked through. ("Mira Schendel" n.p.) 
Schendel's work often uses letters, as well as other signs, that float free of any 
linear arrangement. In the same memoir, Flusser describes one such work, 
given to him by the artist: 
A sheet that hangs freely in space, suspended from the ceiling. It consists of two transparent sheets of acrylic about one and a half meters 
square, fastened together. Between the two sheets, very thin pieces 
of rice paper have been mounted in such a way that they overlap one 
another in places. The papers have been marked with black signs. Other 
signs have been inscribed on the four sides (the two inside, and two 
outside) of the acrylic sheets. Since it is all perfectly transparent, the 
observer is looking at a text through which he can see the room. And 
because the sheet swings easily with any air movement, the observer 
sees a text that changes constantly in space .... The text consists of at 
least four different kinds of signs: letters of type, letters of Latin script, 
FIGURE 1.1. Mira Schendel (1919-1988; Brazil, born Switzerland), Graphic Object, 1967. Graphite, transfer 
type, and 011 on paper between transparent acrylic sheets with transfer type. Museum of Modern Art, 
New York. Promised gift of Patricia Phelps de Cisneros through the Latin American and Caribbean Fund 
in honor of Luis perez-Orama. Copyright 2018 Estate of Mira Schendel. Courtesy Hauser & Wirth. 
10 What Asemic Writing Is 
numbers and elements of calligraphic writing. [Many of these] yield 
words and sentences in various languages, giving the impression that 
one has somehow formed these words and sentences onesel£ Others 
yield images of scenes, such as that of a swarm of bees consisting of "a," 
or an army of "b's" on the march. Still others yield geometric formations 
(spirals, for example). But all of these shapes call one another into question, because many can see through them and so reject them. The overall impression is one of a completely meaningless text, yet one that can 
be deciphered at any point if one focuses attention on just that point. 
This is the asemic effect, suspending the observer in a productive tension. And 
what is produced, Plusser would assert, is conceptual: "We have before us an 
attempt to present thought constructions ('concepts') to us as images, to make 
them imaginable" ("Mira Schendel" n.p.).4 
The fact that typefaces, recognizable letters of the alphabet, and even whole 
words are to be found in the piece Flusser describes (as well as many other 
works by Schendel) raises a reasonable question. If, conceptually, asemic writing marks a moment of rupture, then why don't these artists choose to address 
print over handwriting? It is, after all, print that has dominated our culture for 
so many hundreds of years. Asemic artists have in fact addressed the familiar 
forms of print media: the Argentinian artist Mirtha Dermisache repeatedly 
made asemic versions of the daily newspaper, maintaining the layout, but substituting illegible characters (Figure 1.2). She also produced asemic versions 
of postcards, newsletters, short stories, and books: her first book, written in 
1967, was five hundred pages long and contained not a single word. Such works 
illuminate the ways in which writing is tamed and contained by its socially accepted formats, a continuing preoccupation with Dermisache: '1\11 my works," 
she said, "create some tension between the communication formats offering a 
stable framework and the act of writing, which provides the unstable dimension" ('~rtist's Statement"). Other artists have deSigned asemic typefaces, 
and we will be examining the work of Xu Bing and Christopher Skinner as examples. But asemic art is usually based in handwriting, just as concrete poetry 
is based in print. One reason for this may be that while print is if anything 
produced more than before, handwriting, as we have seen, is in its last days. 
Distanced by disuse, handwriting becomes strange; it offers itself as a new subject for exploration, precisely because it has rather suddenly become old. 
'~~.I'. ia:= =r..; ;:.:: 11111111\1 it.£.!. • --== 
::='.;.::, ---,. ....... _11 I GJI'4........ ..... ---. II.... -,.~~ \\ IIII....-v'· .... - ... r-... '-"Y ....... -~ ~ ,. ,........... ::':"-= .. &ws -or 
.---- ........... 11\\11 I ~ .- CL:c>J ... ' ~~-;:;-= ............. :7.-:'; ,._. 
::=:i 
~ __ r.... 'II .....- ~#~ ta:di • 0 ... ........ 
• :::y~ "' __ ,. ...... ~--== _ ....... =~--:: ~.~...- 11\1111'11" a -......... "=:;. .. _ .... ....-,.,... ............. r ... ~ ....... _,....- ............. .~-. ....- 111111111111111111111 aAt:J 
~ .- ¥.--~ . ,. ........ ....... r-....., ..... ,. ..... ,.r ... 1/11111111
1111111111. 11 111 ---""'WF ... U14 .. ... _r _ .. ~ ...... ___ , .. ..- 1111, " •• 11.11,111 ~ ... _.-r ........ ....... ·· " .. ,. .. r 
~ ....... 
.. ,... ' 
.. .. I.II'···IIII.I""'I"" 
III.I •••• IIII.III' ... 
___ 
,...... -. 
~ ~ ~ 
__ ,.. .-.. ~ yor-..- IIU IIh.II I , " ~- ... 
..--.. ...-....... -~ ..... I.U ...... 'U(Ultlll" .. II11.11 ~ .... , ................ ~.... IIeI ___ .. 
........ ~.~,. ............. I3UII"III'-lIlIIlrllra __ I. .,~ .. ~ .. -r~-r- .. 1111." .......... . 
-,. ............. ,.-.... " ................. .. .... ,,.... _ .................. IIIIIII"lhll ... '.1I1I 
... --- ....... ~ ... ~ ::::~~;'~~~:::~:;; ........... .-w, ... ., ..... h,III.,IIII .. I,,11I1I 
-.-....... 
~ ...... ........ r 111.,11,1, ••• '111111 
.... ~ ._ .......... ~ .•• n,.IIIIII"", •• ,,1 • ~ _. U_.IIIII.It.1I1111111111 
"lalall)_~ 
Prft'l'llatl\~ 
rtHMt .... ~ 
1111 hi" lUI 
Ilid 1111111 
-.. ___ ... ~ 111111,11111'"11111' 
--.......... ~""p ....................... " ... "....,.. ..... ", .. .. ~ ... ....- ......... 1\\11\1" "111\\111' .. ,...-.., ....... 
............. ....... - 111111111'10'"1111 11111" ',.- ~-C" ,.,. ........ ", ..... -r_ r-...... 11"'111/1111111111111'1' .......... ' ... ,....." ... ..... ,..~ ........... 11111'"" " , ...... -... .......... ~ .... .. 
............ ,. ... ~ ,".1111111 "'.-. r.....-........ ·- 1111.11,,,,,. III I1IIII I II :.1':"':11'''''''':11'1111111 ... .....-.~,',.,....." ... II II I 1'··111111 •• 11'1 ...... --., ............. '-~"' ..... II II b" .. Il". IIIIUllIlIllIlIllI1I ...-- .... .....---.-....--
"'''II'II"U 111111'"1"111111 ~"'-'''''. ·'at'.~ ... "' ..... " .. ·11"''' ••• • t .a.~.,\oIIiII ........ --,., .""In ... "" ..... '" .. ,,, ...... , .... 'u ... lllilo 1t1,1II1 .. II ~~-I ""'.---.-~ 
.,',. 111 •• ".1 """ll"'"'' .. ,,, .. ,", ...... , ................ " .. , .. ~P't'WI ......... ",,', • 
•• n .. 1 ........ "lU""'"'' ... , ..... " ..... " ::::r.::":I:I~'~:::I.'::!::~ ..... n~ .. .,.."..... .... I,... "II"U",'''''' m,,, •.. Uh .. l"m IIII I 111111111 • 111111111 ....... " ... .....-. ... )111,.. .. h, 111111111 :',~:::.';, ~:;~ '.':!':':": .',:;,~: ::"I·I:,:·.:I:I::"'II,,;~',':: ,''-,,, ...... )ttItlII ... "' •• ... ," " ........ """" '" ,,,''''',, ..... JlIII .. II .... IIII11.IIII1 .... 'U ... "'" ,.. ................... " ... 
• " ... , Ull , ••••• "" ......... '., •• III(· .. II"UIIII' .. I··,IIIIIIIIIII., ........ ,.. .... ...,....... .... 
" ..... II ............. , ., •• ,III11I1I1I1I1,III.QIIJI/I1I ...... t\\ •• ~_ ...... • ,,' "'.1' ................... " "tI " .... ,.,,111111',11111111/"".,11.11 ' ___ 7- ID 
',"b"UIIU .11 ...... h., '1" .......... :~~:I::,I:\:::.::I::'::'~~rll.'I""/ ......... Jhll ...... ..... IUI.lIl1l.na It ••• It .......... , ........... 'IIII1 .... III111.,IIItM .. p..1 n, ... 1(1 ...... . 
... u., ... '" II •.• ' .. , .. II ••• n ••• 1~'~·;!~.',::::.'I'.itl;:i;;:~lf ...... ' ....... " 
I ., ••• 1'1' •••.• " •••••• ".1 •• 1 • • II.,,, III. I IIIIIIIIIU. &-.... 
•• .11. h.lI ............... " ...... , il''''II~:';III~''IIIHII!l1I1 _I'~ ............. " .,.1 • I • a ................ , ............. IUP"'''''' 111"'''"' ..... \\(., ......... ',,' ...... 1111,""1111 :::.,., :':.:.~ •• ::: ::','.::;.':1,':1::':: ::::~.,·,·.;t::-:.7:~·:ci:::::I: ..... , ............. ..., ... " .... , 
FIGURE 1.2. Mirtha Dermisaehe (1940-2012, Argentina), Diorio N° I Ario I, 1972/1995. Offset print on 
paper,47.5 x 36.6 em (closed). Courtesy Archivo Mirtha Dermisaehe. Buenos Aires, 2018. 
12 What Asemic Writing Is 
Another reason for asemic artists to be drawn to handwriting is because it 
is drawn. "What is the difference between writing the alphabet and drawing it?" 
asks the cartoonist Lynda Barry (36). No difference, Paul Klee would reply} 
writing and drawing, he said, are fundamentally the same (103). Fundamen· 
tally, yes-but distinctions can be made, and Tim Ingold lists four: 
First} writing is a notation; drawing is not. Secondly} drawing is an art; 
writing is not. Thirdly, writing is a technology; drawing is not. Fourthly, 
writing is linear; drawing is not. None of these distinctions} as it turns 
out, is entirely trustworthy .... Writing is still drawing. But it is the 
special case of drawing in which what is drawn comprises the elements 
of a notation. (120-22) 
It is worth noting that the presence of "the elements of a notation" does not 
require that these elements communicate anything whatsoever. The Voynich 
manuscript is a case in point: it has defied any attempt to retrieve from it an 
esoteric knowledge; yet it is recognizably a version of writing, albeit a cryp· 
tic one. 
At a young age, children make no distinction between writing and draw· 
ing: a child will "write" you a chimney on top of her picture of a house, and will 
announce that she will "draw" her name (Dyson 372). Even before they are 
able to write their names, children will depict the look of a writing they cannot 
yet read. "Educators," says Tim Gaze, "talk about children going through distinct stages of 'mock letters,' 'pseudowriting' and so on, when they're learning 
to write. Many of us made asemic writing before we were able to write words" 
(Asemic Movement 1). Asemic works} then, may return us to our first childhood 
encounters with writing. 
In an essay titled '~Writing Is Drawing," the cartoonist and child psy. 
chologist Serge Tisseron argues that the equivalence asserted by Klee origi· 
nates in a single graphic gesture found in a child's earliest scribbles. As the child 
draws, the hand enacts a movement away from the axis of the body, a move· 
ment of loss. Looping back, though, the line lassos a section of space. This act 
of possession is confirmed as the eye registers the trace on the page-though 
the looping motion is performed too quickly for a conscious checking of the 
results, which comes at a later, more self-conscious stage. So "painting and writ-
What Asemlc Writing Is 13 
ing," Barthes said, "will have started with the same gesture, one which was 
neither figurative nor semantic but simply rhythmic" (Leeman 35). The result 
of this rhythmic process is the typical circularity of a child's early scribbling. 
In Tent Posts Henri Michaux addresses such a child: "It pleased you to tum and 
to make things turn, and then repeat; without thought or study you dashed off 
spiraling lines that spawned endless whirlwinds: at an age to repeat, you took 
advantage of it right away, tirelessly circling, picking up again, again, starting 
over" (117). This repeated motion Tisseron relates to another famous repetition, that of the fort-da game played by Sigmund Freud's grandson. As with that 
game, the aim of the graphic trace is to control the threat of loss, or rather to 
lasso something that, while writing is going on, still remains to be found. There 
is always the possibility that the blank page, which may be viewed as a site of 
infinite potential, may yet swallow up all the words we pour into it. 
"Leaping into the void," says Mary Jacobus, "the mark both creates space 
and defines it" (80); and this is part of a fascination with the graphic that begins in childhood and may be continued by adult writers and artists. Yet many 
a mark is returned to the void during writing's ongoing revisions. In computergenerated text words disappear without a trace of the process that brought 
them into being. But when it is a hand that writes, the writing process is tumultuously evident in crossings-out, scrawled insertions, arrows, and (when all 
else fails) doodles. The chaos of the first draft, as genetic critics recognize, has 
its own eloquence, telling us something about the writer's thought processes 
and psychology. This is so even when no word can be made out clearly, perhaps 
especially then. An illegible manuscript demands that one go beyond verbal information to the subtler messages conveyed by the way the marks on the page 
are drawn-matters of spacing, linear configurations, and overall texture. 
For such reasons, the graphism of asemic writing can be linked to graphology. While graphology has generally been considered a somewhat dubious discipline, Walter Benjamin, for one, took it seriously. He was not only a theoretician but also a talented practitioner who was paid for his work and gave lessons. 
In two essays he took pains to detach graphology from its facile characterolOgical aspects. Instead he viewed handwriting as a set of "hieroglyphs," which is to 
say that he viewed writing as image. To the claim of one graphologist, Ludwig 
Klages, that "writing is determined by gesture;' Benjamin points out that "this 
14 What Asemic Writing Is 
theory can be extended: gesture in its turn is determined by the inner image" 
( 132), one that is fundamentally linked to the body. "Language has a body and 
the body has a language," Benjamin writes; "graphology is concerned with the 
bodily aspect of the language of handwriting and with the expressive aspect of 
the body of handwriting" (133).5 It is perhaps only when language is drawn 
that the expressive sense of a body can fully emerge. While printed language 
can use various strategies to achieve expressive ends, what is expressed is something other than the body. In this sense, according to Brian Rotman, when language is spoken it says more than it does when it's written: 
We listen, it seems, not to speech sounds as such, not, that is, as isolatable sonic entities, but to the movements of the body causing them; we 
focus on what happens between the sounds, to the dynamics of their 
preparatory phrases, pauses, holds, accelerations, fallings away, and 
completions-the very features of gestures we attend [to] when we 
are perceiving them. (23) 
In contrast to this gestural dimension of the voice, 
alphabetic writing ... splits the voice, selecting from the stream of 
speech (what it defines as) words to notate, jettisons all trace of their 
tone, and sets up its own neurological apparatus to handle the writing 
and reading of the resulting letter notations. (29) 
So when it becomes writing, Rotman asserts, language loses the expressive 
aspect of the body. Certain prosodic strategies of literature-such as rhythm, 
verbal echoes, and the sculptural shape of sentences-work to restore the gestural component of speech, and with it an affect beyond articulation. But this 
affect can be produced instantaneously when the line on the page is itself an 
expressive gesture. 
In sum, asemic writing has the potential to restore elements that are obliterated in the technology of the alphabet; and it can do this more effectively and 
eloquently than is the case with computer technology. For Flusser's assertion 
that electronic media are impelling a fundamental shift toward "technical images" can be met with a counterargument: that alphabetic communication is 
not only more pervasive than ever but also more standardized; and this is due 
What Asemic Writing Is 15 
precisely to the dominance of electronic media. Matthew Fuller and Andrew 
Goffey argue that "the policing of language that has historically been accomplished by specific norms of rationality and the institutions in which they are 
staged and advanced, is today accomplished more and more frequently by 
specific technological apparati" (149-50). Commenting on this sentence, Rita 
Raley lays out some of the characteristics of the new normal: 
Character limits are a primary technique for the algorithmic management oflanguage, limits from text field controls to messaging prodding 
the user to shape her language in accordance with presets, externally 
imposed constraints that operate according to logics of bureaucratic 
rationality. The elements of style now: more than a seemingly arbitrary number of characters would be unnecessary, excessive, unruly; 
and typographic symbols such as colons, semicolons, and dashes are 
decorative embellishments hindering the smooth functioning of plain 
text. The poliCing of form extends to design-optimal line lengths, 
article containers, templates, all "specific norms of rationality" enforcing 
consensus about linguistic and communicative standards, proper forms 
of expression that function under the alibi of "readability:' (n.p.) 
The result is a global linguistic machine that offers templates not only for words 
but also for thought; that values information over affect; and that reinforces the 
long history of the alphabet's dominance over Western thinking (De Looze). 
To all this, asemic writing offers an implicit resistance. Moreover, it frequently expresses its aims under the same banner as that which it resists-a 
global language. Michael Jacobson, one of the leading spokespersons for asemic 
writing, lists among his goals "the creation of a transnational global post-literate 
writing culture" (Medsker). The Finnish artist Satu Kaikkonen amplifies: 
Asemic art ... represents a kind oflanguage that's universal and lodged 
deep within our unconscious minds. Regardless oflanguage identity, 
each human's initial attempts to create written language look very similar and, often, quite asemic. In this way, asemic art can serve as a sort of 
common language-albeit an abstract, post-literate one-that we can 
use to understand one another regardless of background or nationality. 
For all its limping-functionality, semantic language all too often divides 
16 What Asemic Writing 15 
and asymmetrically empowers while asemic texts can't help but put 
people of all literacy-levels and identities on equal footing. (Kaikkonen 
and Melton) 
Mirtha Dermisache puts it succinctly: of her work she says, "Anyone can read 
it as well as anyone" (Durgin). This comment, and Kaikkonen's "equal footing" may give a mistaken impression of unanimity-another version of the flattening out characteristic of that other global language, computer code. Asemic 
readers are equal, though, only in their freedom from prescribed modes of 
reading. They are free to meet the extraordinary variety of asemic writing with 
an equal variety of responses. Alongside his goal of a universal global language, 
Jacobson hopes for "a personal asemic language for everyone" (Medsker). That 
would mean, for both asemic writers and asemic readers, something exactly 
contrary to the unanimity of the "global": a new and beneficial Babel. 
This tension between the personal and the global makes many asemic practitioners hesitate to see themselves as part of a "movemenf' Certainly there 
is a flood of asemic writing-it might even be described as a tsunami-to 
be found on the Internet and, increasingly, on the walls of art galleries. The 
term asemic has become widespread and is now being applied to work in film, 
sound art, dance, and even architecture. There is even a manifesto for '~semic 
International," written by the Russian asemic artist Ekaterina Samigulina, that 
uses a familiar rhetoric (~semic workers of all countries, unite!") to encourage 
the use of asemic writing for political purposes. Such an agenda, and indeed the 
very idea of a codifying manifesto for asemic writing, has been generally opposed by its practitioners. Of course one can have a movement without having 
a manifesto, and the question then becomes how one defines a "movement:' In 
2015-16, the online journal SCRIPTjr.nl published a series in which twelve of 
the most prominent asemic artists were asked to respond to four specific questions about asemic writing; one of these questions asked whether asemic writing could be described as a movement. The responses were mixed. Christopher 
Skinner's answer is typical: 
There is certainly a "communityn of asemic artists out there, many 
of which are collaborating and promoting new works in a variety of 
formats. A movement would suggest that there is some underlying aim, 
What Asemic Writing Is 17 
collective values and organized identity. My experience has been quite 
the opposite; many people doing their own thing, pleased that there are 
others with similar tastes and approaches, affording them the confidence to publish and promote their work together and solo. 
Tim Gaze, in his response, is more at ease with asemic writing being called a 
movement. Indeed, he says, ''I'm partly responsible, haVing published 3 issues 
of an e-zine titled asemic movement." He then goes on to comment, "The movement is not just about examples of asemic writing; it also has potential to ask 
us to rethink some fundamental questions such as: What is writing? and What is 
reading?" It is those fundamental questions that have impelled this study. 
Within the title of this introductory chapter, then, there can be found a 
shorter title with a larger scope: "What Writing Is, and Why:' This book will 
not fully answer that larger question-how could it? -but it will repeatedly 
engage with the question through the suggestive power of asemic art. What 
Flusser asserted of Mira Schendel's work is true of work by every asernic artist: 
that it is "an attempt to present thought constructions to us as images, to make 
them imaginable." 'This is not to say that asemic writing is the mere illustration 
of certain preexistent concepts. Rather, it is a provocation to thought; and the 
thinking it encourages is not that of a system or science. It is open-ended, based 
in wonder and in wondering. It has something to say about an abstract notion 
we call "writing"; but it reminds us that such a notion can exist only through a 
multitude of writings, each with its own individual expressivity. Consequently, 
the depiction of writing by asemic artists is endlessly varied. In forms of great 
beauty or power or strangeness, their works address themselves to the mind 
through the eye. The asemic, as its name indicates, may be without meaning; 
but it is not without significance. 

THREE ASEMIC ANCESTORS 
Henri Michaux, Roland Barthes, and Cy Twombly 
Henri Michaux: Line and Sign 
Doubly gifted, Henri Michaux not only produced a remarkable body of work 
in literature and art but also aimed in both fields to push beyond their governing conventions toward something that he often described in terms of a space 
within, or beyond. While he began with words, he soon found himself straining against their limits: "those sticky hangers-onJ
• (ces collants parten aires) 
he called them in 1951 (Mouvements "Postface"). This distrust was unabated 
throughout his life. In 1984, the year of his death, he published Par des traits, 
a book of drawings that concluded with an essay tellingly titled "Of Languages 
and Writing: Why the Urge to Turn from Them:' 1 There he rails against what 
we would now call the globalization oflanguage: 
A business enterprise now, language, unbeknownst to anybody, takes 
the place of murmurs, laments (faint or clear), calls. Commanding, 
commandeering. 
Destined to become an ADMINISTRATION into which every 
conscience must enter. 
Master of the situation, language will answer every need (!). Like 
tyrannies. 
'The handcuffs of words are on for good. (n.p.) 
Michaux had given his resistant response to this in 1972: 
Born, raised, educated in an environment and culture uniquely given 
over to the "verbal:''''' I paint to decondition myself. (Emergences 9) 
19 
20 Three Asemic Ancestors 
The asterisk takes us to an afterthought with Flusserian resonances: "and before 
the era of the invasion ofimages." Images, then, are not the answer to the dominance of words; more invasive than ever, they must be fought against, gone 
beyond. Emergences/Resurgences is a retrospective and a record of that struggle, 
one in which words are seen as a certain kind of image, albeit a restrictive one. 
Untrained as an artist, Michaux one day feels the urge to draw. He begins 
with a single line, a "sleepwalking line," which he does not so much inscribe as 
follow: 
Line not yet having made its choice, not yet ready to have the point 
explained. 
Without preference, without accentuation, without entirely giving 
in to what attracts it . 
. . . Watchful, wandering line. (Emergences 11) 
Much later, in 1954, Michaux wrote ~ventures de lignes" as a preface for a 
book on Klee. In it he speaks oflines that "go for a walk. -The first that one has 
seen like this, in the West, walking" (114; my translation). This is of course a 
recasting of Klee's own sentence: "A line goes out for a walk, so to speak, aimlessl}') for the sake of the walk" (Notebooks 105). Such a wandering line implicitly resists Flusser's association of linearity with writing. 
It was seeing Klee's work in 1925 that led Michaux to overcome his distaste 
for painting, which he had viewed up to then as the unnecessary duplication 
of an "abominable reality" ("Quelques renseignements"). Klee was the first 
painter to take him by surprise, followed by Max Ernst and Giorgio de Chirico. 
The first two especially may have influenced Michaux's initial efforts at asemic 
writing. Occasional works by Klee, such as his 1924 Collection of Signs} have an 
asemic elementj 2 and Ernst was to produce major asemic works (Maximiliana 
and Festin) in the 1970s. However, it was probably Michaux's own impatience 
with the limits of words that led him to produce Narration in 1927 (Figure 2.1). 
A classic of early asemic, this work is usually reproduced only in part, with just 
the last five lines shown. It is indeed the fact that these are arranged as horizontallines that makes them recognizable as a species of writing. This is so despite a very different use oflines in the individual signs-which at the start of 
this section are neither individual nor Sign-like. Lacking the clarity that would 
Three Asemic Ancestors 21 
be needed to make up a legible sign, clusters of fine nervous lines sprawl into 
space and intrude upon each other. As they continue, they start to become less 
multiple, made up of a single line rather than a cluster of them. Finally, at the 
bottom of the page, the line breaks into separate units that resemble another 
work that Michaux did at the same time, titled Alphabet (Figure 2.2). This account of course ignores another progression, the one that precedes the section 
usually focused on. The markings in the top three-quarters of the page are less 
clearly reminiscent of asemic writing, and so tend to be ignored. Yet they form 
a progression of their own. They end with a similar approximation to handwriting; but they begin, at the top of the page, with shapes that bear no resemblance to writing, floating in a white space unstabilized by any ground. These 
vague forms might be equivalent to Flusser's notion of what precedes actual 
signs on the page: the stage at which thoughts "begin to take a very nebulous 
shape within me" ("Gesture of Writing" 1 0 ). For writing to take place, though, 
that beginning must be clarified, ordered linearly, and finally translated into 
signs that carry with them a will of their own: whole histories of use, of connotation, of grammatical strictures. This is the unwieldy material with which the 
writer must work. Writers can sometimes strike fire from obdurate words; but 
that is a power of words themselves, and is far removed from the very different 
power of the space within, or the dedans, as Michaux referred to it. Narration 
might then be seen as an attempt to articulate, in the form of a subversive writing system, everything that writing excludes in the process of coming to pass.3 
After lines, Michaux tells us, he began to make signs-indeed we have seen 
that progreSSion on the Single page of Narration. Yet signs did not allow him to 
make any progress toward his real goal, which was to give expression to that 
space within, its strangeness and its truth: "1 would gladly make signs, but a 
sign is also a stop Sign," he says (Emergences 11) -presumably because it signifies, and terminates in its Signification. So when Michaux turned to signs his 
aim, as stated in Par des traits, was to insignifier-a COinage that means both to 
"not-signify" and to "un-Signify." This is not a simple negative; the word fuses 
Signification with resistance to it. Michaux desires something more from signs 
than their assigned meanings: "A continuum. A murmur without end, like life 
itself" (Emergences 11). In an essay published in 1957, he identified this continuum with life in its truest aspect, beyond the categories that language, among 
other things, imposes on it: "I wanted to draw the moments that, end to end, 
I, .,,---
J\ _...A~~ . ~~\c.:: ~--
,~ ~ lfJ.t[-~o-· ~~ -4(( 
/ ~ 'i~ ~/ t 
;J.f.. J> '\'1S~ (Co t .?t:.., 
~.~y' l Jr-~ t f( ~ 
.. ./ 
~""~":"f 
FIGURE 2.1. Henri Michaux Narration 1927 I d" i k SODRAC. Private co"ectio~" ." n Ian n on paper. Copyright Estate of Henri Michaux I 
'. L ~ .11\ Af T '9 . 
FIGURE 2.2. Henri Michaux, Alphabet, 1927. Indian ink on paper. Copyright Estate of Henri Michaux I 
SODRAC. Private collection. 
24 Three Asemic Ancestors 
make up life, to make visible the interior sentence, the sentence without words, 
the cord that unrolls itself indefinitely, sinuously, and deep within accompanies 
everything that presents itself, outside as well as inside" ("Dessiner" 197; my 
translation). The desire for a "sentence without words" led him to an asemic 
practice that emphaSized both continuity and constant change-that is to say, 
movement. 
"I am among those who love movement," Michaux wrote, "the movement 
that breaks up inertia, that tangles lines, that shakes up alignments, ridding 
me of construction" (Emergences 44). As he continued his experimentation 
with signs, then, a sense of movement was increasingly manifested in the 
forms on the page. Expressing neither thoughts nor the letters that claim to 
convey them, these forms were meant to convey a certain interior tempo. That 
all beings have such a tempo, habitual and native to them, had been confirmed 
for Michaux in 1956 by a terrifying acceleration in his own tempo during his 
experiments with mescaline. Before this, though, in the 1951 Mouvements, he 
was already attempting to convey this sense of a movement that is not external 
but essential. 
Mouvements is a book of markings (Figure 2.3), markings that themselves 
are generated by movements of the hand and accidents of ink. Michaux allowed these to come into being in accordance with unplanned impulses. A long 
poem at the center of the book describes, in a tumult of imagery, the shapes 
that resulted from this process: lasso, seaweed, grapnel, electrified larva, crazy 
stick, and many more surreal images. These category words recognizably apply 
to specific shapes on the page-which is not surprising, since the words arose 
from the shapes. However, Michaux habitually refuses, rages against, the categorizing tendencies oflanguage; this refusal generates the excessive, continually 
shifting imagery of his poem, as well as the shapes on the page. To call them 
"shapes" is indeed to freeze the element of movement that brought them into 
being, and that they are meant to express. Rather than shapes, Michaux calls 
them gestures: 
(pre-gestures that one feels, but cannot identify 
gestures in oneself, much grander than the visible and practical 
gesture to follow) (translation by Bernard Bador and Clayton Eshleman) 
Three Asemlc Ancestors 25 
The physical gestures depicted on the page merely reflect movements that have 
preceded them, which are not only movements of the hand but also interior 
movements. In a brief essay titled "Signes," Michaux writes: 
I have to speak now about my signs .... I made thousands of them two 
years ago [for Mouvements]. But were these really signs? They were gestures, interior gestures [gestes intfrieurs] for which we have no limbs, but 
only a desire for limbs, ways of stretching [tensionsL ways of reaching 
[elans]} and all of them executed by lively ligaments, never thick, never 
weighted down with flesh or closed in by skin. (Oeuvres 431; translation 
by Carrie Noland) 
Using the language of the body to express something other than the body, 
Michaux here distinguishes marks on the page that can be read as stable signs 
from marks that reflect in their form "interior gestures." These are not a matter of signifiable meaning but of emotion; for emotion impels gesture as its 
deepest unconscious source. Speaking of gesture, Flusser admits that one of 
the difficulties with this term is that it covers "a very broad and ill-defined region ranging from sensation through emotion and feeling to include ideas" 
("Gesture and Sentimentality" 4). It is notable that emotion occupies a central 
position on this continuum. Our responses to sensation or perception have an 
emotional component, which also accompanies the first vague forms of our 
ideas: "Thinking has its beginning in visuo-kinetic images," Brian Rotman asserts (22). Such kinetic images are related to emotion, which after all is a word 
with a kinetic component: it is etymologically connected (through the Latin 
ex-movere) to the idea of a movement outward, indicated in Michaux's passage 
by the stretching and reaching movements that express a certain primal desire. 
Unsurprisingly, the gestural signs in Mouvements are strongly evocative of 
dance. Before his travels in Asia, Michaux had witnessed dance performances 
with a stony indifference; the dances that he encountered in Asia, however, 
were a revelation: "The corset fell," as he puts it ("Danse" 697). Not that he 
considered himself a dancer, but he saw in dance a powerful expression of 
what he was striving to attain in other media. Dance embodied his lifelong 
attempt-intense and at times desperate-to free himself from restrictive 
conventions in order to break through into a realm beyond them: 
FIGURE 2.3. Henri Michaux, from Mouvements, 1951/1982. Copyright Editions Gallimard. 
Three Asemic Ancestors 27 
In many dances, the body performs figures of liberation. This weighty 
object destined to fall back heavily at every moment wants only to soar, 
to liberate itsel£ It is in fact to the dancing body that one returns in 
order to know what it means to be free. ("Danse" 698; my translation) 
Dance is made up of visuo-kinetic images, to use Rotman's terminology. These 
not only communicate through various kinds of motions (including at times 
complete immobility) but also convey experiences that are essentially emotional. Thus the question often asked by an audience member bewildered by 
contemporary dance, "What does it mean?" is the wrong question, for the 
answer has already been conveyed directly to the brain and even the body of 
the viewer, bypassing the rational centers.4 In a sense, then, dance is asemic. 
Viewing dance as asemic allows us to see in it a resolution of Michaux's desire 
to find a continuum that would take him beyond signs that are "stop signs:' 
Certainly dance can be viewed as a sequence of Signs, and even as a continually unrolling sentence: Mallarme called dance a "corporal writing" (une ecriture corporelle; 107). If there are affinities, though, there are also significant 
differences. Marie-Aude Pacreau comments as follows on the calligraphy of 
Mouvements and the choreography of dance: 
There is in these two arts-dance and calligraphic poetry-a similar 
defiance of form, a similar desire to attack it in order to expand it to infinity. But where dance immediately disintegrates before the spectator, 
writing inscribes itself in duration, even if there can be no two readings 
of "Mouvements' that are the same .... Dance collapses the distance 
between life and art more easily than writing, for the body resists the 
"stickiness" of words that Michaux deplored (contre la colle). The body 
doesn't aspire to fix itself in a form: it is a succession of ways of being. In 
the sign of a movement, signified and Signifier join. (quoted in Parish, 
Henri Michaux 301; my translation) 
This may hold if one is conSidering dance movements as signs; but the reverse 
of this-signs for dance movements-is much more problematic, as evidenced 
by the difficulty of creating systems of notation adequate to the dance, systems whose signs at times evoke asemic pages.5 Upon discovering a copy of 
Mouvements, the Canadian choreographer Marie Chouinard was inspired to 
28 Three Asemic Ancestors 
treat it almost like a book of dance notationsj and she created a major work by 
the same name. Her dancers, dressed in black, perform on a white floor against 
a white screen on which are projected Michaux's drawings; at moments the 
dancers' bodies form lines equivalent to the lines of those drawings before their 
movements continue (numerous clips from this work can be found online). 
However much Michaux wanted to depict an interior movement preceding the sign, that depiction could be accomplished only through a species of 
sign. In work published years later he asks, "Who could, wholly, escape from 
signs?" (Grasp n.p.}-signs that he also describes as "my first and foremost 
quest" (Emergences 76). His work, then, exhibits a tension, a straining against 
the limits of signs while at the same time revealing their nature. The markings 
in Mouvements may reach into space, may evoke movement both exterior and 
interior. Yet many of the book's pages are laid out in a regular grid, with signs 
isolated from one another in space. 'This arrangement is reminiscent of illustrations found in Chinese writing manuals or studies of Paleolithic pictographs; 
Michaux's library included examples of both. He had also used a grid to layout 
his 1944 series of "alphabets." Such an arrangement evokes conventional signs 
and the matrix by which they are diSciplined and ordered; at the same time the 
signs pull in a completely contrary direction through their vitality, unpredictability, and sense of motion. The tension is deliberate: <lWhat is a resemblance 
without a dissemblance?" Michaux asks (Grasp n.p.). This applies, of course, to 
asemic writing as a whole. 
In his 1979 book Saisifj translated by Richard Sieburth as Grasp, Michaux 
gives us perhaps his most inSightful thoughts on the significance of this sort of 
tension. He starts by describing the project he had in mind before he made the 
first marks: to make a kind of bestiary. During the process of doing this, certain 
animals elude him, and others turn up more and more frequently, with insects 
coming to dominate. What is being represented on the page, though, is at odds 
with a certain perverse resistance in the artist. It is this tension that becomes 
the real subject of his artistry, and of the words that accompany it. One word in 
particular sums it up: saisir, translated as "grasp." For Michaux, this becomes a 
profoundly ambiguous word: 
My various efforts to maintain a grasp, to seize on things, soon aggravated my oppositional bent and the more I was determined to draw an 
animal the more I would refuse it. My desire to "render" these animals 
Three Asemic Ancestors 29 
worked at cross-purposes with a whole series of refusals-refusal of 
representation, refusal to make them resemble, refusal to submit myself 
to resemblance in general, refusal to see myself as alike .... Without 
knowing it, without even noticing it for a long time, I was returning 
back to the primordial split of "yes" vs. "no," of acceptance vs. the horror 
of acceptance. (n.p.) 
This split or tension becomes more interesting than Michaux's original aim of 
depicting animals or insects, as he takes his cues from what emerges on the 
page: 
Images at once displayed, negated and erased. 
Weren't they more complete this way, more satisfying? 
That's how it felt to me. 
My proposed nomenclature was falling by the wayside, into oblivion. 
Wanting as I did to grasp these insects, grasping had become the main 
thing, grasping being something that does not come naturally to me 
(a late acquisition), grasping having as its contrary "contemplation," 
diSinclination, an attitude of reserve. 
In the end, GRASPING was nothing more than a dynamiC, an 
abstract kind of grasp, or tending toward that. (n.p.) 
This abstract quality reflects a fascination, never to be fully resolved, with the 
very process of sign making. 
Signs are graspings: not that they can actually seize that which they claim 
to stand in for, but, rather, they are graspings at. They will never attain the goal 
toward which they strive, which is something ineluctably other than signs. Yet 
signs are our only tools for expressing something that at least points to that 
other. If Michaux is clear about his distrust of signs-a distrust that sometimes 
erupts into sheer rage-he also values what they can do, even if that is not 
everything: 
Signs, not for being complete 
but for being faithful to the transitory 
not for conjugating 
but for regaining the gift of tongues 
one's own at least, for, if not oneself, who will speak it? 
30 Three Asemic Ancestors 
That is how Michaux put it in Mouvements (n.p.). In Grasp he now exclaims, 
"To seize a situation via signs, amazing! What a transformation!" After a few 
pages of signs, he continues: 
Nothing expresses a situation more soberly, more astonishingly, more 
magically than a few signs assembled together, even if the situation be 
completely ordinary and familiar and then turn fantastic, outlandishand be reconsidered. (n.p.) 
It is by leading one to this reconsidering that signs can have value-if they are 
signs that are themselves reconsidered, remade, beyond the standard and consequently imprisoning signs that close us in. 
Michaux's attitude toward signs is emotional, a combination of rage and 
desperation as he tries to get past the conventional expectations of the page to 
something that he himself does not yet know. More than an emotional attitude, 
though, it is a philosophical one. Michaux is not so much focused on bringing 
an artistic project to completion as he is on what happens to him during the 
process of sign making. A large part of what he writes consists of deSCriptions 
of his creative process, one that is truly experimental, since he is willing to follow not just a single line but the whole process as it takes him into unknown 
territory. As with Schendel and her dialogue with Flusser, we have here another 
instance of the artist as an unsystematized (but for that very reason subtler) 
version of the philosopher. Near the end of Grasp, Michaux sums up what he is 
taking away from the process that began with the plan for a bestiary and now 
has become a study of what it means to grasp something, anything: 
To grasp while abstracting yourself ever more, to grasp the tendency, 
the accent, the pace, the space. To grasp the underlying. (n.p.) 
What began in particulars has ended in abstractions, a trajectory that is surely 
at the core of philosophy. The abstractions in this case include the thinker, who 
watches himself move beyond his "personality" and into a process that is in a 
sense inhuman: what Michaux here calls "the underlying" (ce qui sOlls-tend). 
That process is described as an abstract mental movement, with no particular 
content: "the tendency, the accent, the pace, the space:' And yet Michaux as-
Three Asemic Ancestors 31 
pires to "grasp" this movement-by which he does not mean to "understand:' 
He makes this plain in a simple equivalence: "Grasp: translate:' 
This is immediately after he has asked "Who could, wholly, escape from 
signs?" It is through signs, then, that Michaux attempts to translate "the underlying," that which is beyond our usual perceptions, and our usual words. These 
are themselves translations, inadequate ones, though they are not generally 
recognized as such. Yet, Michaux asserts, "everything is translation at every 
level, in every direction." This is already the case. It is the artist's task, then, 
to make this evident; to resist the inadequacy of our accepted translations 
of reality; and to strive for new translations, "ghostlier demarcations, keener 
sounds" (Wallace Stevens, "The Idea of Order at Key West"). This is also the 
philosopher's task: "I am convinced," says Vilem Flusser, "that the problem of 
translation is the central epistemological problem" ("Gesture of Writing" 11). 
Asemic signs, precisely because they defy translation, allow us to let go of conventional words and to grasp, or to grasp at, something that would otherwise 
elude us. They fulfill Michaux's aim "to make visible the interior sentence, the 
sentence without words, the cord that unrolls itself infinitely, Sinuously, and 
deep within accompanies everything that presents itself, outside as well as inside" ("Dessiner"). 
Roland Barthes and Contre-ecriture 
The span of Roland Barthes's life (1915-1980) was contained within that of 
Henri Michaux (1899-1984); both lived in Paris and moved in its intellectual and artistic circles. Yet there is no evidence that they ever met. Certainly 
Barthes knew of Michaux's work: in a 1980 interview he called him one of his 
aines, or elders ("Lectures de l'enfance" 1249); and as early as 1944 Barthes 
had included Michaux among his favorite poets (Calvet SS). Michaux's greatest 
influence on Barthes, though, may have been on his art. 
A "Sunday painter," Barthes called himself, but his painting was hardly confined to Sundays. His workplace was not complete, he said, unless it included a 
place to write, a place to play the piano, and a place to paint ("Almost Obsessive 
Relation" 180). So whether in Paris or in the country, his workplaces were laid 
out exactly the same-which, he once joked, showed that he was good structuralist. At his death in 1980 more than five hundred of his works were willed to 
32 Three Asemic Ancestors 
Romaric Sulger-Buel, to whom many of them were inscribed. Sulger-Buel later 
donated much of that collection to the Centre Pompidou. The works have been 
featured in a number of exhibits, some during Barthes's lifetime, some posthumously. Barthes never did an oil painting, preferring lighter, more spontaneous 
media: gouache, crayon, pen and ink. Like Michaux, Barthes believed in letting 
the work evolve almost of its own accord, in compliance with its materiality: 
ink blots, unconscious squiggles, a method akin to that of gesture painting or 
doodling. Whether it is the method or Michaux that accounts for it, the graphic 
works of the two men often look quite similar. Indeed, at times Barthes seems 
to be directly imitating his predecessor: an untitled drawing of March 19, 1972 
(Figure 2.4), is clearly indebted to Michaux's 1951 Mouvements (Figure 2.3). 
Most Significant for the present study is the fact that both Barthes and Michaux 
executed works that represent writing. 
In 1976 a selection ofBarthes's contre-ecritures, as he called them, was published in a special issue of the journal Luna-Park titled "Graphies" (Dachy) 
(Figure 2.5). His work appeared alongSide that of artists now recognized as 
Significant figures in the development of asemic writing, such as Christian 
Dotrement, Mirtha Dermisache, and Brion Gysin. His author's note read, in 
its entirety: "If my graphisms are illegible, it is precisely in order to say No to 
commentary." Barthes's hostility, I would suggest, is not based in the fact that 
commentary opens his personal work to the critiques of others. Rather, it is 
a response to commentary's fundamental nature. For commentary endlessly 
extends language; it is in the service of an impossible quest to extract the last, 
the final, drop of meaning. Barthes had learned instead to bypass meaning in 
order to unlock the power of the illegible. He had learned this from Michaux, 
but also from others. 
In his essay about the abstract series of ten letters that were the final works 
of the painter Bernard Requichot, Barthes refers to "a special semiography 
(already practiced by Klee, Ernst, Michaux, and Picasso): illegible writing" 
("Requichot" 220). And the month before he died Barthes wrote his "Note sur 
un album de photographies de Lucien Clergue," in which he refers to "recent 
painters of Trace, Michaux, Masson, Twombly." Trace, he explains, is "an intermediate sign, or unfulfilled, or overfulfilled [suraccompli], a transitory clue about 
who-knows-what" (1204; my translation). These deSCriptions could readily 
apply to asemic writing, especially given the painters he cites, who all produced 
FIGURE 1.4. Untitled dra wing . by Roland Barth es,1972. 
FIGURE 2.S. Roland B arthes, Contre-ecriture. 
34 Three Asemic Ancestors 
work of that type. Another significant influence was Mirtha Dermisache (Figure 2.6), who might have been to Barthes something like what Mira Schendel 
was to Flusser, had they lived in the same city. On March 28, 1971, Barthes 
wrote to Dermisache what can only be described as a fan letter: 
Mr. Hugo Santiago was kind enough to show me your graphics notebook. Let me just tell you how impressed I am, not only for the highly 
artistic quality of your strokes (which is not irrelevant) but also, and 
especially, for the extreme intelligence of the theoretical problems 
related to writing that your work entails. You have managed to produce 
a certain number of shapes, neither figurative nor abstract, that could 
be defined as illegible writing-leading to suggest to its readers, not 
messages nor even the contingent forms of expression, but the idea, 
the essence of writing. Nothing is more difficult to produce than an 
essence, i.e., a shape that refers to its own definition. Haven't Japanese 
artists devoted a lifetime to learn how to draw a circle that does not 
refer to anything but the idea of the circle itself? Your work is akin to 
that requirement. I fervently wish that you may continue and publish it. 
Please receive my best wishes for success, particularly in your work, and 
my most cordial feelings. (Letter) 
Upon receiving this letter, Dermisache-who had never heard of Bartheswent out and bought a copy of Writing Degree Zero. After reading it, she was 
inspired to write a book of her own that, like her other books, contained not a 
single word (Durgin). Barthes's practice of illegible writing, then, connects to 
a number of studies he made of others who practiced it, studies that make us 
aware of the role played in writing by the material, graphic element. 
For Barthes, writing was a sensual act. There is a certain "pleasure of the 
text" in the physicality with which words emerge from under the hand; and 
consequently in the pen that is held in the hand and supplies the flow of ink. 6 In 
a 1973 interview, Barthes confessed: 
I have an almost obsessive relation to writing instruments. I often switch 
from one pen to another just for the pleasure of it. I try out new ones. I 
have far too many pens-I don't know what to do with all of them! And 
yet, as soon as I see a new one, I start craving it. I cannot keep myself 
from buying them. 
... ~ 
.t"~~~#f 
~~WMlln'mll~~~ L/~ 
FIGURE 2.6. Mirtha Oermisache (1940-2012, Argentina), Carta, 1970. Courtesy Archivo Mirtha 
Oermisache, Buenos Aires, 2018. 
36 Three Asemic Ancestors 
When felt-tipped pens first appeared in the stores, I bought a lot of 
them. (The fact that they were Originally fromJapan was not, I admit, 
displeasing to me.) Since then I've gotten tired of them, because 
the point flattens out too quickly. I've also used pen nibs-not the 
"Sergeant-Major," which is too dry, but softer nibs, like the ')." In short, 
I've tried everything ... except Bics, with which I feel absolutely no 
affinity. I would even say, a bit nastily, that there is a "Bic style," which 
is really just for churning out copy, writing that merely transcribes 
thought. ("Almost Obsessive Relation" 178) 
But wait-is it not the purpose of writing to transcribe thought? So it is generally assumed; and if it is generally assumed, it comes to be accepted without 
question. This is the nature of myth as Barthes had defined it nearly twenty 
years earlier. In the same interview Barthes says: 
Putting things on the most material level, I would even say the most 
minimal level possible ... is an anti-mythological action: it contributes 
to the overturning of that old myth which continues to present language 
as the instrument of thought, inwardness, passion, or whatever, and 
consequently presents writing as a simple instrumental practice. (177) 
This resistant view of writing appears as well in "Variations sur l'ecriture," 
which Barthes had written that same year but which was not published during 
his lifetime. It opens with his clarification that the term ecriture is not to be 
taken in its usual sense. "Today ... it is to the manual sense of the word that I 
would like to come, it is 'scription' (the muscular act of writing, of tracing letters) that interests me" (1535; translation by Neil Badmington), That interest 
held to the last year of Barthes's life, when similar preoccupations emerge at 
one point in his lecture courses titled "The Preparation of the Novel." Barthes 
is here interested in the speed of writing, and whether that is related to an author's "style." The evidence indicates, for instance, that 
Proust wrote very quickly by hand, and the whole of his oeuvre owes 
much to that muscular facility. Proust was aware (letter to Robert 
Dreyfus, 1888) that he wrote at a gallop. The "gallop" presupposes a kind 
of asymptotic rapprochement of the manual (the muscles) and the mental (the affective): the hand seems plugged directly into the mental. (265) 
Three Asemic Ancestors 37 
This speedy writing is contrasted to slow writing and its reasons (e.g., excessive superego, a need to inscribe words deeply). These speculations encourage 
Barthes to risk a definition of the work as a "kinetic relationship between the 
head and the hand" (265).7 In this relationship the head does not automatically have priority: it may be dictated to by the hand quite as readily as the 
other way around. Yet the hand, the pen, the paper, "muscular facility," and the 
sense of the writer's body-these have been rendered all but invisible in considerations of a writer's work. 
Another neglected element of writing is color: 
To be examined: coloured writings-the few of them that exist. Colour 
is impulse; we are afraid to sign our messages with it; that is why we 
write black [nous ecrivons nOir); we only allow ourselves well-ordered, 
flatly emblematic exceptions: blue for distinction, red for correction. 
Any change of colour [toute saute de couleur] is particularly incongruous: can you imagine yellow, pink, or even grey missives? ("Variations" 
1562-63; Badmington's translation) 
Apparently Barthes had no trouble imagining this-his own inks were downright voluptuous: 
Thursday, March 9 [1978], fine afternoon, I go out to buy some colors 
(Sennelier inks) -? bottles of pigment: following my taste for the names 
(golden yellow, sky blue, brilliant green, purple, sun yellow, cartham 
pink-a rather intense pink), I buy sixteen bottles. (The Neutral 48; 
translation modified) 
Beyond his personal predilections, Barthes imagines "books in red-brown, in 
forest green, in Indian blue"; and he goes on to wonder whether this change 
in color would also change the meaning of the words ("Variations" 1563; 
Badmington's translation). This introduction of color into writing brings it 
closer to painting. 
Indeed, Barthes contests the notion that painting and writing are fundamentally different: "Nothing separates writing (which we believe communicates) from painting (which we believe expresses): both consist of the same 
tissue" ("Requichot" 220-21). So in Empire of Signs he reproduces aJapanese 
ink drawing with a two-sentence caption: 
38 Three Asemic Ancestors 
Where does the writing begin? 
Where does the painting begin? (21) 
The point is not to arrive at an answer but to throw into question our usual 
distinctions. Barthes wants to fuse these distinctions into a single wordgraphism-which he applies to his own asemic writing. Andre Masson's ideograms, among other artistic productions, exemplify this fusion for Barthes: 
Masson's work during this period demonstrates that the identity of 
written and painted features is not contingent, marginal, baroque ... 
but somehow persisted in, obsessive, including both the origin and the 
perpetual present of any drawn line: which is that of an undifferentiated 
"graphism." ("Masson" 1S4) 
These visual and muscular aspects of writing are generally obscured by the primacy of writing's communicative function. We see the message, we see what 
the writing means, but we do not see the writing. Consequently Barthes can assert, with no sense of paradox, "for writing to be manifest in its truth (and not in 
its instrumentality), it must be illegible" (UMasson" 1 SS ). In this way the graphic 
element is allowed to reclaim its primacy. 
And yet any such illegible writing carries with it the shadow of the legible. 
This is the point of a passage to be found in All Except You, Barthes's book on 
Saul Steinberg. That book, like others by Barthes, is composed of a number 
of fragmented observations, each with its own heading. Here is what he says 
under the heading of "Illegible": 
As with many other objects, Steinberg submits handwriting to a principle of similitude: he produces similitudes of writing. However, writing 
is not an object like others: its substance is, if not transparent, purely 
instrumental, or at least always significant: writing cannot exist without 
carrying a meaning: either it directly refers to a message, or it refers 
indirectly to a psychological disposition: it is an object that imperatively 
signifies, more than the spoken word which sometimes, by cries rhythms 
and vocalizations, simply expresses. In scrupulously imitating this object 
without allowing it a shadow of utility, Steinberg makes of meaning a 
"vicious" machine (which fundamentally it perhaps always is); meaning 
becomes at the same time a furious urge (you want at all costs to deci-
Three Asemic Ancestors 39 
pher) and a deception without closure (there is nothing to decipher: 
you know this, but you persist). (22) 
Even in the heart of the illegible, then, there is a perverse persistence, a compulsion to find meaning. Let me now yield briefly to that compulsion. 
Barthes's asemic works defy decoding. Yet if they do not signify, these 
signs may nevertheless be Significant. Barthes often treated these evocations 
of handwriting just as one would treat conventionally written notes. Romaric 
Sulger-Buel speaks of «these contre-lettres, slid under my door, or given during 
our encounters at Rue Servandoni, at Florence, or while traveling" (personal 
communication, November 6, 2011; my translation). Not to get too earnest 
about all this, I must first stress that they are playful. They are also affectionate, amorous even: addressed to his lover, they may be a way of overcoming 
the problem expressed in his book A Lovers Discourse: "Love has of course a 
complicity with my language (which maintains it) but it cannot be lodged in 
my writing" (98). And so it is conveyed in these asemic notes that say nothing 
and everything. 
Something more is at stake here, connected with Barthes's sense of himself as a homosexual within a system that defines him above all through language. Language, he says, is "the controlled exchange on which the semantic 
process and collective life are based" (Roland Barthes 63). Harold Beaver, in 
his fine essay "Homosexual Signs," asserts that consequently "the fundamental 
ethical problem is this: to recognize signs wherever they are, not to mistake 
them for natural phenomena, and to proclaim rather than conceal them" (100). 
Barthes's asemic writing is such a proclaiming. As early as Mythologies, Barthes 
wrote: "Language is never anything but a system of forms, and the meaning is a 
form" (133). So a resistance to meaning itself is called for-to meaning's claims 
to be natural, and consequently to be the rock-solid foundation on which our 
collective lives are built. The kind of resistance that Barthes advocates is not 
readily identifiable as political action, transgression, subversion, or revolution. 
"What is difficult," he writes, "is not to liberate sexuality according to a more or 
less libertarian project but to release it from meaning, including from transgression as meaning" (Roland Barthes 133). 
'The way toward tIus release seems to be modeled, for Barthes, on Zen practice. He had been introduced to Zen by reading Alan Watts's book on the subject, and through two trips to Japan. Barthes's book Empire of Signs celebrates 
40 Three Asemic Ancestors 
Japan-or rather, as he admits, a ttsyrnbolic system" called by that name, and 
which he has had a hand in defining. It is defined above all by its exemption 
from meaning. "'The West moistens everything with meaning," Barthes complained; his trips to Japan offered him a way out. This was not only because "the 
murmuring mass of an unknown language constitutes a delicious protection" 
to the visitor (9). Beyond this audial asemic, Barthes sees the delivery from 
meaning everywhere in this culture, in its most disparate aspects: in literature 
("the haiku's task is to achieve exemption from meaning"; 81); in the Bunraku 
puppet show ("here again we come to that exemption from meaning"; 62); in 
the ceremonial bow (which "glOrifies ... not meaning but the inscription of 
meaning"; 68). So the signs of this Barthesian version of Japan do not signify 
anything other than themselves; there is no possibility that through them any 
meaning will be fulfilled. Instead, these signs make possible something more 
valuable, which Barthes calls the interstice. 'The lacy appearance of tempura is 
described as "the interstice without specific edges, or again: the empty sign" (26). 
And presented with ikebana, the art of flower arranging, "you can move your 
body into the interstice of its branches, into the space of its stature, not in order 
to read it (to read its symbolism) but to follow the trajectory of the hand which 
has written it: a true writing" (45). His ignorance of the Japanese language 
allows Barthes to inhabit the truth of writing: ttl live in the interstice" (9). 
'The lure of a communicative fulfillment, then, is not so much resisted as 
completely ignored in this construction of Japan. Here we find no "desperate 
filling-in of any nullity which might reveal the emptiness of language>t (70), as 
happens in the West. There, writing is seen as the "transcription" of articulated 
language ("Masson" 155), though it is evidently different from it; and language 
in its turn is viewed as the custodian of meaning. But if that is the case, language cannot itself be the meaning that it purportedly conveys. Meaning must 
be something different from either writing or language. And until we have separated writing, language, and meaning from each other we have little hope of 
understanding the nature of anyone of them. It is Barthes's aim in this book to 
make us understand that separation, a separation that has already been accomplished in his Japan, with no fuss whatsoever. In contrast, the West adopts the 
most remarkable contortions to preserve the sense of fulfillment to be found 
in meaning. Emptiness itself is made to become meaningful: the paramount 
example being silence, which becomes "the sign oflanguage's fulfillment" (71). 
Three Asemlc Ancestors 41 
If neither language nor silence delivers us from the claims of meaning, what 
other options do we have? Barthes writes: 
It is not a question of halting language on a heaV}'1 full, profound, mystical silence, or even on an emptiness of the soul which would be open 
to divine communication (Zen knows no God); what is posited must 
develop neither in discourse nor in the end of discourse; what is posited 
is matte, and all that one can do with it is to scrutinize it. (Empire 74) 
Matte is a curious term, perhaps akin to Ie neutre, the topic ofBarthes's seminar 
of 1977-78. He uses the term again a few pages further on in a dense passage 
invoking Zen satori as 
"awakening to the fact," apprehension of the thing as event and not as 
substance, attaining to that anterior shore oflanguage, contiguous to 
the ... matteness of the adventure (what happens to language, rather 
than to the subject). (78) 
This passage occurs in a discussion of the Japanese haiku, the origin and anchoring point of these abstruse ruminations. Let me try to unpack the points 
being made here. I will begin with what the haiku is not. It is not substance, and 
it is not subject. Barthes is here implicitly criticizing a notion of the subject that 
attributes substance to it: not material substance, of course, but a conceptual 
substance-that is, a meaning that can be attributed to the subject and that 
sums it up. In the West this is reflected in phrases like tithe meaning of my life" 
or "the kind of person I am:' Such phrases promise a fulfillment, and moreover one that can be expressed in language. What is ignored, and is central to 
Zen practice, is an awareness of emptiness-and in particular, for Barthes, an 
awareness of the emptiness of language. Referencing Zen again, Barthes writes, 
"Writing is, after all, in its way, a satori: ... it creates an emptiness of language. 
And it is also an emptiness oflanguage which constitutes writing" (Empire 4). 
So without the gloss of meaning (in more than one sense of gloss) we are left 
with a matte surface, neutral and factual, which is the "retrospective, reconstituted" result of a certain use of language. That use differs from the usual attempt to communicate a meaning, or even an emotion that is the property of 
an individual subject. Neither of these obtains in the haiku: Barthes scathingly 
42 Three Asemic Ancestors 
dismisses attempts to read its objects as symbolic. Rather, an object in a haiku 
is presented only as itself; and the haiku's language is also presented only as 
itsel£ Now, what is this "itself'? The defining characteristic of this "selfhood" in 
both cases is not a fulfillment but an opening into emptiness. The haiku evokes 
the "anterior shore oflanguage"-anterior to our understanding oflanguage as 
a tool of our understanding, a means to communicate a meaning that is owned 
beforehand by the writer. 
In many respects what Barthes asserts of haiku is also true of those modest 
"doodles," as he once called them, that make up his asemic works; and it is also 
true of the art he admired and wrote about. Of Requichot's last letters, Barthes 
says, '~ll this super-writing, a meaningless scribbling, opens out on oblivion" 
("Requichot" 221).lt is "super-writing" because it is writing in its essence, no 
longer upstaged by the claims of meaning. Through these works we can see 
writing for what it always was: a kind of scribbling. Nor is that word intended 
to denigrate. Asemic writing gives us something that normal writing too easily 
ignores. It evokes the physicality of the hand that creates the line, or that follows it blindly, as Derrida has asserted in Memoirs of the Blind. Akin to drawing, these works open to an oblivion, an emptiness, that is the ultimate and unknowable source of our writing, our words, and our concepts: the whiteness of 
the blank page is its material equivalent. Out of this nothing comes something, 
and we seize upon it and call it our own. But let us not blind ourselves to the 
emptiness that interpenetrates that something, whatever it may be. 
Barthes, who founded his career on the analysis of signs, grew increaSingly 
aware of the hollowness of their claims to meaning. If we follow his lead we will 
want to strip signs-all signs, and not just homosexual ones-of their claims to 
be natural, to define, and even to pass themselves off as thought itself. We will 
want to do this, and we will fail-just as we fail to resist the lure of Significance 
in Steinberg's illegible writing. And that is not so bad. The Zen state of satori, 
which frees one from meaning and from self, is attainable only in flashes. But an 
awareness of what lies beyond our familiar structures of meaning may keep us 
from having our life scripts written according to an already existent system of 
signs. Meaning and nonmeaning combine in writing's system, as well as everything that follows from it. Remembering this, being aware of it not just as a 
theory but in our very bloodstream, is going to make our lives much more-in 
many senses of this word-queer. 
Three Asemic Ancestors 43 
Cy Twombly: Writing with the Left Hand 
If we are going to consider Cy Twombly as an asemic painter, in any sense, the 
first thing we must face is the very prominent role played in his work by legible 
letters. An extreme example is Virgil (Plate 1). Superficially, it consists only of 
the name on a white ground. It is a name, however, that carries with it a freight 
of cultural associations: "By writing Virgil on his canvas, it's as if Twombly were 
condensing in his handwriting the very immensity of the Virgilian world, all 
the references of which this name is the repository" (Barthes, "Wisdom of Art" 
180). Mary Jacobus, in her treatment of this painting, has unfolded a multitude of such references. These are not merely intellectual footnotes, but carry 
with them complex emotions: melancholy, tranquility, a sense of transience 
but also of transcendence. For Twombly, living in Rome and immersed in 
Mediterranean culture, Virgil's name alone can evoke all this. 
Yet this is not a painting of Virgil's name alone-if indeed such a thing is 
even pOSSible. For a name to exist it must always be embodied in a certain materiality, whether of sound if it is spoken or of graphism if it is written. And 
the graphic form that it takes here is Significant. Had Twombly used Roman 
square capitals, the effect of this work would be very different: elegant, monumental, stable, culturally prestigious. Here the spindly capital letters are uneven, as is the ground on which they are set. They reveal not the letters "alone;' 
but also the idiosyncrasies of the hand that has drawn them. Unstable, they 
lean forward; there is a sense of motion to the right, or perhaps of yearning. 
An ambiguous background of beige-gray, coming to the fore like a sandstorm, 
blurs the outlines of the letters. They are semi-obliterated to various degrees, 
with the L of VIRGIL at the right being the least affected, and the initial Vhalf 
erased. Yet an erasure is not an absence, though it may become the sign of an 
absence. So "the vapor wrought by erasers" (Fioretos 8) takes on the characteristics of an atmosphere, the same "cloudy atmosphere of off-white and gray," 
as Jacobus describes it (174), that serves as background for the inscribed letters. But atmosphere is more than that: Barthes refers to "the indeterminate 
and inexhaustible total of reasons, pulsions, and indolences which surround 
the action with an atmosphere" ("Cy Twombly" 160). The action here is the 
writing of Virgil's name; and atmosphere is the antithesis of that inscription, an 
antithesis out of which the name emerges and to which it returns. Atmosphere 
44 Three Asemic Ancestors 
is in itself a nameless thing, but to the degree that it can be represented at all, it 
is represented in Twombly's work by whiteness. 
Whiteness was from the start recognized as an important aspect of what 
Twombly was doing. After Twombly had moved to Italy, the poet Emilio Villa 
wrote a poem about him that began "Cy is / white talent" (35).9 At about the 
same time (1957), Twombly wrote about his use of whiteness in the Italian 
magazine L'esperienza moderna: 
The reality of whiteness may exist in the duality of sensation (as the 
multiple anxiety of desire and fear). 
Whiteness can be the classic state of the intellect, or a neo-romantic 
area of remembrance-or as the symbolic whiteness ofMallarme. 
The exact implication may never be analyzed, but in that it persists as 
the landscape of my actions, it must imply more than selection. (quoted 
in Varnedoe 27) 
Fifty years later, in an interview by Nicholas Serota, Twombly somewhat incoherently linked whiteness to the page before it is marked: "1 like white .... 
It's not closed. And I think psychologically it's like there's no beginning or end. 
Then the painting doesn't have a centre-it comes in one side and goes out the 
other. And so white is that ... And I'm also a draughtsman so writing in white 
is almost impossible. Write in grey, in red or anything else. So it's the piece of 
paper; and you can write in it or do what you want. Bruise it or ... " (52). The 
sensations that accompany one's first approach to a blank page or canvas lurk 
behind a cryptic sentence in the Italian article: "The reality of whiteness may 
exist in the duality of sensation (as the multiple anxiety of desire and fear)." 
This combination of desire and fear is precisely the emotion that one can feel 
before the demands of an empty creative space. 
Immediately after his comments on whiteness in the Serota interview, 
Twombly says, (fThat was for a long time. Then came all the colour:' Color, 
though, is not necessarily the opposite of whiteness in Twombly's work. For 
one thing, his whiteness is not flat but vital, pulsing with implications of depth 
and, yes, color. In 1962 Gillo DorHes observed that the vast whitenesses of 
Twombly's canvases "have the power of colour and matter and are actually the 
'fullest' part of the picture" (65). IO 
We would seem to have strayed quite a bit from the question of the asemic 
Three Asemic Ancestors 45 
aspects of Twombly's work. Yet the power of that work arises to a large degree 
from the relationship between what is never a mere backdrop and the signs 
inscribed upon it, whether these are legible words or illegible scrawls or something between. "Something between" might in fact describe the effect of asemic 
writing, which holds out the promise of the legible and at the same moment 
denies it. Twombly does something similar. Even when his markings produce 
a recognizable word, one is aware that this legibility is tenuous, provisional, 
and liable at any moment to dissolve into illegibility, or whiteness. If this is true 
of the capital letters of Virgil, it is even more true of Twombly's cursive. He 
adopted various techniques to resist a writing that fell all too easily into the 
sureness and control of a lifetime's training. While in the army, he made himself 
draw in the darkj and from about 1957, according to Robert Pincus-Witten, 
"fearing slickness, he drew as if with his left hand. To avoid striking the surface 
straight-on, he drew in oblique and contorted angles, punitively disciplining 
his linear seductiveness" (59). Barthes takes the simile ofleft-handedness further, identifying Twombly's marking practice as "gauche:' 1his is partly because 
of the deliberately clumsy element in his inscriptions, but most of all because 
of an attitude that is opposed to the whole notion of writing "right" for purposes of clarity and communication. The "gauche" or the "lefty;' Barthes says, 
"is a kind of blind man: he doesn't quite see the direction, the bearing of his 
gesturesj only his hand guides him, or that hand's desire, not its instrumental 
aptitude" ("Cy Twombly" 163) .11 The result is a precarious inscriptive practice, 
emerging out of a sea of white that makes these scrawled signs seem poignantly 
fragile. For Villa, in his poem about Twombly, it is 
not a field with words 
not a field without words, 
not a field with or without, 
but that only which is touched 
in the sharp white net, 
.... on a field of ineffable manifestations. (35) 
At about this same time the critic and curator Palma Bucarelli wrote a note 
for Twombly's exhibition at the Galleria del Cavallino in Venice, which read 
in part: 
46 Three Asemic Ancestors 
On the remote trail of a memory that seeks at the back of the mind, 
at the limits of consciousness, vague feelings imprinted, in time, who 
knows when, in the sediment of sensations, the sign sharpens, stiffens, 
passes heSitantly, reaches the edge, continues beyond in invisible space 
the fleeting conversation . 
. . . Poor, tenuous signs count for nothing, you can lay on a coat of 
whitewash, the voices fade now truly dead, the surface is white, everything is ready to begin again. (44) 
These signs need not be writing, whether actual or allusive. The Age of Alexandefj 
for instance, includes among its various signs geometrical shapes, scribbles, 
fragmented phrases ("sempre," "why," "sad flight"), doodled airplanes and 
submarines, numbers, small rectangles, and the date: "1959 into 1960," the 
New Year's holiday during which the painting was done, but also referencing 
the birth of Twombly's son Alessandro in December. 'This "journal canvas," as 
Jacobus calls it (38), measures nearly ten feet by sixteen feet. The signs that 
cover it, though, are on such a small scale that they are scarcely visible on a 
reproduction of the whole painting; they are mere fleeting episodes on a resonant ground of white. 
Putting to one side other aspects of Twombly's practice, such as the 
"stain"-whichJacobus maintains "is also a textual residue" (175), without 
going into detail about this assertion-we will turn now to a more recognizably asemic work by Twombly, the series of thirty-eight drawings titled Letter 
of ReSignation. The set is dated 1967, but numbers XVI, XIX, and XXI were 
begun in 1959, the same year that he executed a related series, Poems to the 
Sea. They are all done in the same format: a roughly ten-by-ten-inch square, 
not the more common rectangular format for letters. The "resignation" is presumably triggered by a frustration and anger that vents itself physically, in the 
violent, agitated movement of the pencil on the page. The emotion is beyond 
words, and so then is the writing. The marks on the page no longer make up 
a controlled and articulate communication, but revert to their primal form as 
draWing. 
The Letter of Resignation, and the emotions that accompany it, may have 
their origin in the hostile reception given to Twombly's series Nine Discourses 
on Commodus when it was exhibited in 1964 at the Leo Castelli Gallery in New 
Three Asemlc Ancestors 47 
York. The most scathing review was Donald Judd's dismissal: "Twombly has 
not shown for some time, and this adds to the fiasco. In these paintings there 
are a couple of swirls of red paint mixed with a little yellow and white and 
placed high on a medium-gray surface. There are a few drips and splatters and 
an occasional pencil line: There isn't anything to the paintings" (38). Reviews 
like this one were traumatic enough for Twombly that they led him to take an 
almost complete break from painting for a year-which might be seen as a 
resignation, though only a temporary one: if the Letter of Resignation reflects 
his feelings, it reverses that resignation even as it performs it. This is not an 
angry farewell but a defiant return to art. 
The initial draWing of the series (Figure 2.7) begins with a thin ruled line 
at the top, and then nothing-only a few minuscule flecks, as if the pencil had 
been dropped to the page and then immediately lifted. Near the bottom is a 
bold, perhaps desperate, scrawl that leaves the page entirely. It then reenters 
below moving in the opposite direction, if one can judge by the trailing stroke 
that concludes at the left by reversing and crossing the line. The first part of the 
scrawl is violently crossed out in one unbroken repeated horizontal scribble; 
such cancellations will be found again on nearly every sheet. The negative space 
here is at least as eloquent as the line that intrudes upon it. 
In an interview with David Sylvester, Twombly has this to say about the 
nature of line: "The line is the feeling, from a soft thing, a dreamy thing, to 
something hard, something arid, something lonely, something ending, something beginning. It's like I'm experiencing something frightening, I'm experiencing the thing and I have to be at that state because I'm also going" (179). It 
is the line itself that goes through the various metamorphoses described here; 
Twombly follows it ('Tm also going"), not without trepidation. If "the line is 
the feeling," then the abstract squiggles on the pages of the Letter of Resignation 
series may be read as the emotional impetus that in a more conventional series of drafts would find its expression as words. Indeed, the very fact that one 
writes multiple drafts betrays the fact that the words come after the feeling. The 
writer tries to fit words ever more closely to the feeling, to its shape and quality; 
and at the same time, like the material line of a drawing, the words are going 
their own way, and taking the writer with them. John Berger, who was both an 
art critic and a novelist, said this of the writer: 
I 
-I 
L~- I FIGURE 2.7. Cy Twombly, Letter of Resignation I, 1967. Copyright Cy Twombly Foundation. Courtesy of 
David Zwirner, New York/London/Hong Kong. 
Three Asemic Ancestors 49 
He doesn't see language with the readability and clarity of something 
printed out. He sees it, rather as a terrain full ofillegibilities, hidden 
paths, impasses, surprises, and obscurities .... Its obscurities, its lost 
senses, its self-effacement come about for many reasons-because of 
the way words modify each other, write themselves over each other, 
cancel one another out, because the unsaid always counts for as much, 
or more, than the said, and because language can never cover what it 
signifies. (45). 
No Western artist, he goes on to say, expresses this as well as Twombly; and he 
expresses it entirely through what Barthes, borrowing a term from paleography, 
calls the ductus: "The hand conducts the line or the stroke, from top to bottom, 
from left to right, turning, bearing down, breaking off, etc .... In TW's work 
the ductus prevails; not its rule, but its play, its whims, its explorations, its indolences. In short, it is a writing of which only the leaning, the cursivity remains" 
("CyTwombly" 164). 
So in the second sheet of the series (Figure 2.8), divided into three sections, we find a writing, as yet tentative, largely composed of wavelike peaks. 
These overlap in a kind of contrapuntal effect, perhaps expressing Bergees observations on "the way words modify each other, write themselves over each 
other:' Over these lightly inscribed waves is scribbled, in the top section, a different sort of ductus: darker, tighter, more rounded. In the second section the 
lines are canceled with a vigorous horizontal scribble. Finally we get only two 
short strokes, devoid of either cursivity or decisive cancellation. Each of the 
lines reflects its own emotional state: "different strokes for different folks," or 
for different aspects of the same writer, as they emerge during the writing process. Sheet XXV (Figure 2.9) might almost be described using that eighteenthcentury phrase "a fine hand": elegantly artistic, it is reminiscent of some of Saul 
Steinberg's pseudo documents. Aside from the tight mark and scribble near the 
bottom of the page, it evokes the forms of words and the overall shape of a letter. Closely related to it is sheet XXXVI (Figure 2.10), where the writing now 
covers the whole page. The hand is propelled by a forward intensity that, given 
the cue of the series title, might be anger or indignation. At times the upward 
strokes shoot forward, and there is a certain unevenness that could be ascribed 
to agitation. The next in the series, sheet XXXVII (Figure 2.11), though it 
__________ -. . l __ .. ... _ .... ________ .. :~~ . 
• ~I 
<p./ i /1 
,/' (,/(/~ 
FIGURE 2.S. CyTwombly, Letter of Resignation II, 1967. Copyright Cy Twombly Foundation. Courtesy of 
David Zwirner, New York/London/Hong Kong. 
l 
"6UO}l6uoH/uopUOll>JJOAMaN 'JaUJ!MZ P!IIea 
JO '<;SalJnOJ "UOnepUn0:l ,c;[qwoMl'<;J l45p,<;doJ "L96L IlXX uouou6/sal/ }oJaJJa7 ',c;[qwoMl,c;J '6'Z 3UnDI:J 
.. ~ ,·:-~~-~~-~~·>·~·~~~t~~~·):·~; 
~:.~.;-,::-,.~.~ -
..... , .-. 
',.\--.:;,-: " 
>~~~·,c~~: .. ," : (,;':~;;';")c' '. 
FIGURE 2.10. Cy Twombly, Letter of Resignation XXXVI 19 . of David Zwirner, New York/London/Hong Kong. ' 67. COPYright Cy Twombly Foundation. Courtesy 
FIGURE 2.11. Cy Twombly. Letter of Resignation XXXVII, 1967. Copyright Cy Twombly Foundation. Courtesy 
of David Zwirner, New York/London/Hong Kong. 
54 Three Asemic Ancestors 
might be described in the same way, has a very different feel to it: the writer 
now seems a bit crazy. The scale of the abstracted words shifts often, and the 
lines upon which they rest become broken and unclear, one dropping higgledypiggledy into the other. The difference between the two sheets is a good example of the way that a different ductus will evoke a different state of mind. 
The dominant ductus in the Letter of Resignation series, though, is the cancellation scribble, as in sheet VIII (Figure 2.12). It appears repeatedly, and 
could be said to sum up the emotional trajectory of the whole. For what is a 
letter of resignation if not a complete rejection of what has come before? And 
if we are reading the pages as a series of drafts, then what the writer repeatedly 
discovers is that the words he has begun to set down are inadequate to the intense emotion he feels. The cancellation scribble is not inadequate: it is vigorous, even violent, and it is never just a single line that strikes out but a line that 
repeats itself compulsively, doubles back upon itself, and does all this in one 
frenzied burst. 12 Another way to cancel is by using white paint. This may be applied in a layer thin enough that it almost merges with the white of the pagewhich in fact is what it attempts to restore. The original writing may sometimes 
show through, giving a blurred effect. More often, the paint is applied in a thick 
impasto, with large blotches of the sort we see on sheet XXV (Figure 2.9). The 
violence with which the paint is applied-by the hand, not the brush-has 
an emotional signification, with the movement of the hand echoing the vigorous horizontals of the cancellation scribble. Indeed, sometimes Twombly uses 
both, scribbling fiercely across the still-wet paint. 
In Twombly's series the depiction, within his square format, of a letter's 
familiar proportions-rectangular, disciplined by its margins-reinforces and 
justifies the title. This occurs, however, only at intervals-as it does in sheet 
xxv, for instance. The incoherent scrawls with which the series beginS gradually become broken into word units, though still not coherent words. The writing is not dated, except for the single "March 18 1959" floating midway in sheet 
XXXIV, And the series begins abruptly, with no salutation. To whom, then, 
might this letter of resignation be addressed? There are multiple possibilities, 
no doubt interconnected: the New York art scenej the dominant currents of art 
at the timej and more broadly than any of these, the other-the unspecified and 
unknown They who will view one's work. For no matter how much one works 
for oneself, following one's own instincts and those of the line, the very fact that 
FIGURE 2.12. Cy Twombly, Letter of Resignation VIII, 1967. Copyright Cy Twombly Foundation. Courtesy of 
David ZWirner, New York/London/Hong Kong. 
56 Three Asemlc Ancestors 
the art is incorporated in materials means that it is meant to be seen (or read, 
or heard). That of course makes the artist vulnerable to the expectations, prejudices, and judgments of that undefined viewerj and this too may be prompting 
Twombly's resignation. 
At the same time that he was creating this work, Twombly was beginning the series oflarge untitled works that have become known as the "blackboard" paintings (Figure 2.13). A superficial view can explain why a number 
of American critics at the time attached this label to the work: on a dark-gray 
ground lWombly has drawn large looping forms with a white oil crayon, reminiscent of chalk. Unlike a blackboard, though, the gray of Twombly's background is layered and textured: he painted it with broad sweeps of a large 
brush, allowing the paint to drip in some places, rubbing it thin in others. Over 
this surface he drew long, unbroken rhythmic lines in "lasso loops;' then partially erased these or obscured them with paint before applying more loops so 
that the painting becomes a palimpsest. The lines seem to emerge from a background that, as with the white canvases, has the look of a resonant atmosphere. 
The relation of that atmosphere to what is inscribed upon it, however, is very 
different in the blackboard paintings. The lines are no longer Bucarelli's "poor, 
tenuous signs" barely holding their own against the whiteness; they emerge out 
of an atmosphere that they partially create, as fainter lines (overpainted or partially erased) are superseded by stronger ones. The plural "lines" is technically 
accurate, but the effect is of one unbroken line. Its implied expansion gives new 
significance to Twombly's comment on the line as "something ending, something beginning. It's like I'm experiencing something frightening, I'm experiencing the thing and I have to be at that state because I'm also going" (Sylvester 
179). For all its beauty, there is indeed something frightening about this line. 
We are facing a kind ofinscriptive sublime, more powerful for the large scale of 
the paintings. This is not merely a minimalist exercise but a vision of writing as 
well, as is evident in some of the later blackboard paintings in which the lines 
take shapes that are evocative ofletters (Figure 2.14). 
This is not how critics at the time generally read these paintings. In a 1968 
exhibition catalog, Robert Pincus-Witten wrote that "handwriting has become 
for Twombly the means of beginning again, of erasing the Baroque culmination of the painting of the early 19605 .... Put bluntly, it has been drowned in a 
schoolmaster's blackboard. It has been reduced to rudimentary exercises" (56). 
FIGURE 2.13. Cy Twombly, Untitled, 1967. Copyright Cy Twombly Foundation. Courtesy Archives Nicola 
Del Roscio. 
FIGURE 2.14. Cy Twombly, Untitled (New York City), 1970. Photograph by Robert McKeever. Copyright Cy 
Twombly Foundation. Courtesy Gagosian Gallery, london. 
Three Asemic Ancestors 59 
Those exercises were of a particular kind, the Palmer method of penmanship, 
commonly practiced in American schools during the 1950s. To encourage a 
rounded, rhythmic script, the students were instructed to use their entire arms 
to make series oflinked circles; Twombly was taught by this method. Many of 
the blackboard paintings do indeed evoke such linked circles-though another 
source for them, it has been pointed out, is Leonardo's technique for depicting 
tumultuous water, which Twombly admired.13 The critics, however, aware of 
the 1964 debacle, preferred to underscore the blackboard as a site of schooling and indeed of punishment: for Pincus-Witten it was as if Twombly were 
writing, over and over again, "I will not whisper in class anymore" (56). Kirk 
Varnedoe, in an essay for the 1994 retrospective of Twombly's work at New 
York's Museum of Modern Art, described the "colorless lines" of these paintings, "whose steady, progressive rise and fall insists on their attachment to the 
drier constraints of writing, will, and culture" (Varnedoe 43). Arthur C. Danto 
later recalled arguing, in his review of that same 1994 retrospective, that the 
blackboard paintings were "the errant pupil's atonement" after his admonishment by Judd (213). Apparently he had not changed his mind in 2011 when 
he wrote this reminiscence. Yet Twombly had already painted three related 
"blackboard" canvases in the mid-1950s, of which only one, Panorama, survives 
today; so far from being schooled by Judd, he was returning to an earlier concern ofrus own with an abstract quasi-writing, both in the blackboard paintings 
and in the Letter of ReSignation. There is nothing submissive about these lines, 
which vibrate with power and, in many of the canvases, loom over the viewer. 
Allusions to blackboards and to Palmer exercises may playa part in these paintings, but the gestural force of the artist's hand continually overrides Palmer's 
stated goal of making his pupils into "writing machines": the left hand's revenge 
upon the right. 
For Twombly, says Pincus-Witten, painting is "a special category of calligraphy" (56)-so special, however, that it may lose all resemblance to writing, 
moving into blotches, stains, drips, and scribbles. I have discussed here a necessarily limited selection from the rich body of Twombly's work, chosen for 
what it may suggest about the nature of writing and of mark making in general. 
Yet this apparently limited approach informs even work by the artist that may 
seem at first to be far removed from asemic concerns. This is so, as well, with 
60 Three Asemlc Ancestors 
Michaux and with Barthes. A certain asemic attitude leads to explorations with 
rich and surprising results, even when these are not immediately recognizable 
as asemic writing strictly speaking-if indeed it makes sense to be "strictly 
speaking" of a movement so richly varied in its origins, its options, and its current unfolding. 
TRACES 
Eco-Asemics: The Handwriting of the Natural World 
Asemic writing is not only produced by artists. According to Gaze, "You could 
say that nature, since time began, has been manifesting asemic writing. It 
just needs a human to see the writing, & recognize it" (Jacobson, "Without 
Words"). It is this writing by nature that De Villo Sloan has christened ecoasemics: "a term used to describe asemic writing found in asemic-suggestive 
shapes in the natural environment:' 
Sloan's defining example is a piece of found art submitted to his blog by 
Nancy Bell Scott (Figure 3.1). The slice of birch bark is positioned "left-justified, 
right-ragged" to evoke the shape of a poem. The lines of the bark then become 
the broken lines of the poem's words. In 1924 Man Ray created his Poem along 
similar principles (Figure 3.2). Both works comment on the fact that, as Vilem 
Flusser has said, "Writing is about setting ideas in lines" (Does Writing Have a 
Future? 6). Scott's work adds to Man Ray's dean lines an antiquarian texture 
that, according to Sloan, is "due to a color resembling parchment and characteristic cracking." Coincidentally, an asemic work by the Spanish artist Casilda 
Garda Archilla (Figure 3.3) almost seems like a drawn rendering of Scott's 
birch bark.l A series ofleft-justified lines are at first relatively straight; but their 
slight waver becomes increasing tangled and inter-netted, creating a crackedlooking texture along the ragged right edge of the piece. Both Archilla's and 
Ray's works comment on the linear nature of writing, though their lines have 
very different qualities. Scott's work does less but goes further: it goes beyond 
commenting on the artifice that governs the material poem to throw into question the relation of nature to that artifice. Of course Scott has adjusted nature 
to reflect a familiar human artifact through her selection and positioning of the 
bark. But in other cases no such intervention is necessary. Such is the case with 
a type of rock known as "graphic granite" (Figure 3.4) j it might equally well 
61 
~~~~ .. ---~~ ........ 
/ 
-.. --,,*,,-~A~-=~~~" 
.i.. . ~.: -:IiI!_!!l~~ ...'.-...... : ...... ~, 
FIGURE 3.1. Nancy Bell Scott, untitled eco-asemic work, 2012. Photograph by Nancy Bell Scott. 
--
___ t-._ .. _ ... 
.. -
--
-
.. 
-
-
--
----
-
-- FIGURE 3.2. Man Ray, Poem, 1924. Copyright Man Ray Trust I $ODRAC. 
FIGURE 3.3. Casilda Garda Archilla, Drawing No.4 from Una conversaci6n con Ana Hatherly, 2005. Pen on 
tracing paper. 
FIGURE 3.4. Photograph of graphic granite (NMNH 111123-1767) by Ken Larsen. Courtesy of the 
Smithsonian Institution. 
Traces 6S 
be an example of archaic cuneiform. Is the similarity to writing in these cases 
merely a matter of selection and projection? Or are we being invited to revisit, 
after all these years, the notion of a "Book of Nature;' albeit in a new version? 
In The Order of Things, Michel Foucault describes the Book of Nature in 
ways that depart from the common notion of a text in the natural world that 
may actually be read for its message; nature's signs and characters are thus 
brought closer to asemic writing. In the medieval and early modern periods, 
Foucault asserts, nature was to be "read" only in the sense of recognizing it as 
a text. It is this recognition of the dynamics of signs, rather than any specific 
signified content, that reveals to those with eyes to see a divine immanence. 
For grammarians in the sixteenth century, "language is not what it is because 
it has a meaning;' Foucault writes; "its representative content ... has no role to 
66 Traces 
play here. Words group syllables together, and syllables letters, because there 
are virtues placed in individual letters that draw them towards each other or 
keep them apart, exactly as the marks found in nature also repel or attract one 
another" (35). This is a description of writing that locates its essence in the 
rhythms and gestural relations of marking. It is precisely this vision of writing 
that asemics wants to convey. The meaning of words is subtracted so that we 
may better understand another sort of meaning, that of writing in itself, beyond 
any particular content that is conveyed. Let us linger, though, on the passive 
construction "is conveyed." There is a specific person behind that construction: 
someone, the one doing the writing, wants to convey something. That is what 
impels the writer to write. If we remove that "something" as well as a human 
author, what is left to impel writing? What brings it into existence? And is that 
existence, now without the purpose that content provides, still what we could 
call writing? In short, an ahuman writing with meaning subtracted raises the 
whole question of intentionality. 
A notorious article by Steven Knapp and Walter Benn Michaels, published 
by Critical Inquiry in 1982, takes on the question of writing's intentionality in 
terms that are particularly relevant to eco-asemics. At one point the authors 
suggest a thought experiment to determine whether there can be such a thing 
as "intentionless meanings": 
Suppose that you're walking along a beach and you come upon a curious sequence of squiggles in the sand. You step back a few paces and 
notice that they spell out the following words: 
A slumber did my spirit seal; 
I had no human fears: 
She seemed a thing that could not feel 
The touch of earthly years. (727) 
Well and good. Perhaps we have here the traces of a particularly literate beachcomber. But when a wave washes over this stanza and leaves in its wake the 
poem's second stanza, one either has to find an agent with an intention (like 
the ghost of Wordsworth or a pantheistic force in the sea) or has to admit that, 
unlikely as it seems, these are accidental marks. In the second case, where the 
Traces 67 
marks are accidental, Knapp and Michaels go on to ask, will they still seem to 
be words? 'They answer with no hesitation: "Clearly not. They will merely seem 
to resemble words .... To deprive them of an author is to convert them into accidentallikenesses oflanguage. They are not, after all, an example of intentionless meaning; as soon as they become intentionless they become meaningless 
as well" (728). However, to rebut this argument it is necessary only to look 
again at the marks in the sand. Even as we repeat to ourselves that these are 
merely accidental marks, it is impossible not to read them; and to read them 
is to recognize them as words, and indeed as Wordsworth. Knowing that the 
writer is not Wordsworth because there is no writer makes no difference: the 
marks, these particular marks, insist on being words. For the author is always a 
latecomer to language. Consequently, authorial intention is, if not superfluous, 
then superadded to linguistic strata that have long since been depOSited in accordance with social, historical, and conventionalizing forces. Such forces have 
an intentionality of their own that subtends whatever intentions the author 
may try to introduce. Words speak to each other before they speak to a reader. 
When Knapp and Michaels assert of those accidental markings in the sand that 
they will no longer be words but "will merely seem to resemble words;' they 
ignore the fact that all words are resemblances. It's not that they resemble in the 
least whatever it is that they signify. They resemble each other: other markings 
in similar configurations that are reproducible for agreed-upon purposes. It is 
only such a resemblance that makes words readable at all, and makes it appear 
that meaning is inherent in them.2 
Now from this to asemic writing is not such a big step as it might seem, 
since to resemble words is the whole mandate of asemic writing. In this practice, both intention and meaning take on new aspects. Intention is no longer 
the desire to convey a verbal message through the instrumentality of writing. The artist intends to make something that evokes writing, and often will 
conSciously reference a particular type of writing, such as Chinese characters, 
cuneiform, or Islamic calligraphy. And while asemic writing eliminates meaning in that it does not convey a verbal message, the evocation of writing is 
meaningful on another plane. It conveys something about the nature of writing that is generally obliterated by the verbal message. To call it "something" 
is about as close as we can get to it, although that word should really be plural. 
68 Traces 
To look at the varieties of writing liberated from its job of conveying messages 
implicitly raises all the questions I have raised so far, and more; and these are 
meaningful. Moreover, even the configurations of the scripted lines convey a 
meaning, a gestural equivalent of a psychological disposition at the time.3 A 
psychological state either shapes the writing, as handwriting analysts have long 
affirmed, or it is produced by the effect of the shapes, as in abstract art. 
With these references to psychology and art, though, we are assuming a 
human presence. How much of what I am asserting will carry over into the ecoasemic? Lees look at some writing in the sand that is markedly different from 
an accidental replication of Wordsworth. First is a piece titled Beach Language 
by the New York artist Rosaire Appel (Figure 3.5). Appel has photographed 
chance configurations of debris on a beach; with no intention to do so, these 
evoke Chinese characters. Jim Leftwich has made a trenchant protest to this 
kind of practice: 
We can read things that are not written. We can be frustrated in our attempts to read things that are not written. But we gain nothing and learn 
nothing by chOOSing to call things that are not written asemic writing. 
We look at the sand on a beach, or the bark on a tree, or the ripples in a 
stream, and we can if we wish say that we are reading what we are looking at, or that we are unable to read what we are looking at, even though 
in some ways it reminds us of writing, but it does not become writing 
if we take a photograph of it, it only becomes a photograph, and it does 
not become writing if we make a rubbing or an imprint, it only becomes 
a rubbing or an imprint. (n.p.) 
Still, it is hard to imagine what an "only-photograph" would look like; it is always going to be a "photograph-oC' And what is photographed is focused upon 
not just in a literal sense; the image is an invitation to look attentively, to see 
what might not otherwise have been seen, and to see it otherwise. But let's collect some more examples to put in the scale. 
Another inscription on the sand has been produced by a crawling creature 
whose intentions are not known to us (Figure 3.6). Titled "Trace," it is part of 
Gibber, a large-scale project by the Canadian artist and poet angela rawlings. 
Her artist's statement for Gibber begins like this: 
FIGURE 3.5. Rosa ire Appel, Beach Language, 2011. Photographs. 
70 Traces 
How do we define "writing"? Does it need to be an act composed by a 
human entity? Does it need to occur with a certain kind of material, on 
a certain material, within a certain time frame? 
HistOrically, biotic and abiotic entities have influenced grapheme 
construction. My interest in asemic writing is born of an asemic reading practice, where I situate myself amongst biotic and abiotic entities 
to see ifI can touch that ages-old enthusiasm to interconnect with an 
environment by recognizing the linguistic within its body. 
One particularly linguistic example of such an enthusiasm is Henry David 
'Thoreau's reading, in Walden, of the sand bank he passes on his daily walk. In 
the spring it has leaflike patterns inscribed by the melting snows; and these 
prompt a detailed meditation on the correspondence between the leaf as found 
in nature and its verbal equivalent: 
The overhanging leaf sees here its prototype. Internally, whether in the 
globe or animal body, it is a moist thick lobe, a word especiallyapplicable to the liver and lungs and the leaves of fat (Ad~w, labor, lapsus, to flow 
or slip downward, a lapsing; AO~O~, globus, lobe, globe; also lap, flap, and 
many other words); externally a dry thin leaf, even as the f and v are a 
pressed and dried b. (306) 
After an expansive meditation along these lines, Thoreau asks, "What Champollion 
will decipher this hieroglyphic for us, that we may turn over a new leaf at last?" 
(308). 
Such an enthusiasm has its dangers, as it may lead to an act of projection: 
looking for the linguistic within nature, you will naturally find what you are 
looking for. Knowing this, rawlings is wary of what she calls "my constant impulse to construct meaning:' She finds it necessary to negotiate an ethical position for herself: 
Asserting that landscapes are passive texts waiting to be actively engaged by readers is ethically perilous. If we hover for a moment, though, 
with the notion that an environment can be interpreted (read), then the 
implication is that the environment itselfis comprised of (or, better yet, 
actively composing) meaning (possibly as a written text). In this case, 
FIGURE 3.6. angela rawlings, -Trace: from Gibber, 2012. 
then, casting a landscape as writing suggests that its ideogrammatic 
formation offers readers an asemic access to the text. 
Traces 71 
An asemic access opens us to seeing signs in the natural world while it simultaneously closes the possibility of decoding those signs to satisfy our human 
meaning-making impulse. This dual movement-promise and frustration-is 
fundamental to asemic writing. But the promise of the eco-asemic is not confined to specific messagesj it answers an age-old yearning to return to a once 
and future language that transcends the human. 
We can anticipate a time, according to rawlings, when "a world of signifiers explodes the dominant human language used to name and to know them:' 
Her close attention to natural signifiers as she photographed the beach's various 
markings gave her some sense of how this might come about. As time went by, 
she found that 
72 Traces 
distinct forms linked with other forms. And I felt certain that, if! 
studied these forms long enough, their construction could very well 
exhibit a syntax through repetition and remix of forms that I might be 
able to decode. By immersion within asemic environmental texts, I also 
increased the possibility that I would view new forms that could be 
used to birth further reading practices, writing practices, and ultimately 
ways of understanding or communicating (whether amongst human 
beings or via interspecies communication). 
Roger Caillois, in his essay "'The Ultimate Bibliophilia," feels a certain guilt 
about the way a book collector's desire for a beautiful object supplants the 
book's function as a repository of ideas. He desires then, "for the sake of innocent bibliophilia," an asemic book whose characters evoke those of nature: 
I wish there were a meaningless set of type, whose characters would 
convey no message, like the whorls of shells, the patterns on butterfly wings, or effigies within stones, like all the abandoned literature 
enshrouded in the history of the planet and slowly accumulating in 
its archives. (62) 
One possible fulfillment of Caillois's wish is a book by the Spanish artist and 
typographer Pepe Gimeno (Plate 2). Titled Hushed Writing, its pages evoke 
sign systems that are familiar, such as Chinese characters, hieroglyphics, and 
Braille, as well as others that are alien and nonetheless authoritative: Gimeno 
assembled them entirely out of materials found on the beach.4 
'The verso of this wish for a book type resembling natural objects is the discovery of an alphabet in nature, as expressed by Alejo Carpentier: <fA day will 
come when men will discover an alphabet in the eyes of chalcedonies, in the 
markings of the moth, and willleam in astonishment that every spotted snail 
has always been a poem" (211-12). 
These are yearnings for a prelapsarian state, a return to language's origins, before it became separated out from nature to become a human artifice. 
Cangjie, the legendary inventor of Chinese characters, is said to have been 
inspired by the tracks left by animals and birds; according to other versions 
he modeled his characters on the markings of a turtle's shell. 'The first written 
source to mention Cangjie is the Huainanzi from the Warring States period 
Traces 73 
(475-221 BC). It reads: "When Cangjie created the characters, millet fell from 
the heavens and ghosts wailed in the night, and as human wisdom increased, 
the virtue of the human kind diminished" (Mikkolainen).5 So at the origin of 
writing, even if it is modeled on natural markings, it becomes alienated from 
the natural world. Maurice Blanchot, in his essay "The Absence of the Book," 
tries to put himself in the place of "the first person who ever wrote, who cut 
into stone and wood under ancient skies": 
What he left behind him was not something more, something added to 
other things; it was not even something less-a subtraction of matter, 
a hollow in the relation to the relief. Then what was it? A hole in the 
universe: nothing that was visible, nothing that was invisible. (471) 
The peculiarity of writing, before we become habituated to it, has to do with 
meaning: a meaning that cannot be securely located in the physical world 
("nothing that was visible") even though the phYSical world is its necessary precondition ("nothing that was invisible"). Stone and wood are made to manifest 
something that is not stone or wood. This sense of strangeness is lost when 
writing separates itself from the natural world to become a familiar tool for the 
use of humans. When it is translated back into the forms of nature, that tool is 
Cfbroken"-to speak in Heideggerian terms-and so reveals something of its 
original strangeness. 
Such a retranslation is the aim of Cui Fei, a Chinese artist working in the 
United States. She uses two titles repeatedly, with numbered variations in 
different media: Manuscript of Nature and Tracing the Origin. Manuscript of 
Nature V (Figure 3.7) is made up of dried tendrils of vines pinned to a wall 
in the linear pattern of a Chinese page, and evokes the so-called wild cursive 
style of calligraphy (Figure 3.8). For another work, Tracing the Origin XVI, the 
artist has replicated the tendril pieces in wire, adding another layer of artifice 
to the natural objects that evoke writing's artifice. However, the script remains 
unreadable, alien. It may even be actively alienating-as in one piece by Cui Fei 
constructed of thorns pasted on a page and titled Read by Touch (Figure 3.9). 
A related work is Written Weed, a book by the Dutch artist Marian Bijlenga. 
Its pages display a "writing" composed of leaves, sticks, seeds, and grasses arranged on the page and photographed (Figure 3.10). The resulting signs are 
)t ... i ...•...... 
' ! 
., 
'.' 
': ~. "." ~ 
' ...•. ~ .... (, 
) 
t 
t 
~ r 
~ 
1 
FIGURE 3.7. Cui Fei, Manuscript of Nature V, 2002-present (detail).lnstatlation, tendrils; dimensions 
variable. Photograph by Cui Fei. 
FIGURE 3.8. Wild cursive. From the collection of Cameron J. Campbell. Courtesy of Daniel von Brighoff. 
76 Traces 
FIGURE 3.9. Cui Fel, Read by Touch, 2005-6. Thorns on rice paper. Each page 9V4 x 10314 Inches; total 
11 pages. Photograph by Zheng Lianjie. 
sometimes purely asemicj at other times they are clearly modeled on existing 
writing systems, including Chinese. Casilda Garda Archilla, whose drawing appears at the start of this chapter} has created a Vegetal Alphabet (Figure 3.11) 
whose variegated signs are all taken from the same natural source: the "reticule" 
of fibers, as she calls it, that holds the seeds of the platan or plane tree. Small 
pieces of this, arranged in columns, create an effect rather like that of Michaux's 
alphabets, or the orderly disposition of the scholarly linguistic illustrations that 
inspired him. 
When Cui Fei refers to "tracing the origin," the word tracing refers simultaneously to tracking something down and to the act of reduplicating. When 
angela rawlings titles her photograph "Trace," that single word may have even 
more implications, prompting us to view a simple squiggle as the summation 
of many problems associated with writing. First there is writing as the trace of 
~ ~ ~\I~' 
c: ?(J' J t "f. t-r'. .. 
·&ef G ~~ 
~.~~ ~ f "ok, 
f' Jt 1 t' t ~ 
;4 f ~ -6 ~c ~. :t¥ ... 
FIGURE 3.10. Marian Bijlenga, page from the book Written Weed, #21, 2004. Catchweed on paper. 
Photograph by Marian Bijlenga. 
t 
• ~ 1 
i 
t iJI ~ 
1 } 
r < \' 
1- 6 r' 
j!!' 
~ 
~ 
9/. 
.,., 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
! 'k 
-4. 
~ ;;,.ft 
! 
I' , 
· · ,) t,·· 
1. 
~' 
f ~ 
t; 
r 
i 
! 
~-...... 
~ 
-I" 
;J 
~ 
." 
~ 
t 
.~ 
~ 
~ 
-( 
~ 
u1 
.( 
+t 
fpt" 
;I 
~ 
" 
. :. .. 
¥. 
v 
...,.... 
t 
t 
V 
br 
., 
I< 
I-
" I 
'w' 
r. 
~ 
ti 
4). 
4 
• ',: 
FIGURE 3.11. Casilda Garda Archilla, Vegetal 
Alphabet: The Signs 11,2012. Vegetal fragments 
on rice paper, 26 x 8.4 em. 
.. hn •• I
"
, ... )&6I L 
--:; ••• ' .,1 .... '· ., . .. ,)j • • \r .10.) 
.,1 ,.
"
,·111 •..••. •• • Joi'''I·~ (1 
... . ~ ... I ••• ' 
"h~ 1. 1" .,
'1, 
• iT •• t 1""&1) 
......... 
·"''''l· , .... "" 
.. .. ,.. , .. I • • ••• 
U"'f 
.1". "' .... .UIIO" 
'I "tI 
... -... , .... -' .. II •••• 
...... ......... 
"' ~ -'Ih, ........ , ...... 
.. " .. II 
.•... .... 
•• u 
., .. ' " .•. ' ..... . , ... 
a,,· e- , 
. .1 .......... . .. u f ' . .... 
~ 
,, \, IIIII1} 
II II W Il • 
Ih ll Iii ,.11 ,1 
-'11 1&111111 - ,I , II i •• II,11 
"'. .. 
'i)UO)!UI!W O!JI?S!I<lg'{q 4d ~J6ol0 4d 
'uo!lcpuno:j ,(,lqwoMl,(,) '('s<lpno) "uo!l~pUn O:l,(,lqwO""'1,(,) 146!J,(,do) "El6L 'l!fiJ!t. ',(,Iqwo""l I.) ' l HV1d 
• 
/ / -I / / ,. f 
"'-/ 
( 
PLATE 3. Max Ernst, 65 Maximiliana, ou f'exercice illegal de i'astronomie, 1964 (detail). Copyright Estate of 
Max Ernst / SODRAC / MaMA, NY. Gift of David S. Orentreich. MD I Art Resource, NY. 
PLATE 4. Andy Bleck, ffom Ab5tract Comin: The Anthology, ed. Andrei Molotiu (Seattle: Fantagraphics, 2009J. 
. ... a dds - make a mark and add a not h er . 
• 
Many of th ese are adds. but so me are extension s. Cursive wriring precedes b y extens ion . 
Printing is. add i t i ve. One mark t h en another. 
• 
Both ser up rhythm s with gaps and connec -
tion s. srraights and Cllrv es . Whar happen s In 
the ga p determines the next. both fo rward 
and backward. past and present. 
, . 
r-o--"" 
\: • 
The mark is made now but now passes a nd 
the n ext mark influ e nc es what went before 
ic. 
PLATE s. Rosaire Appel, page from odds, 2016. 
PLATE 6. Cecil Touchon, Post DogmaliH Painting 11756,2015. Acryli c on pa per over canvas, 48 x 48 inches. 
Copyright 2018 Cecil Touchon. 
PLATE 7. Jeremy Balius. asemi( typewriter, 2013. 
~ 
> " ," fl' " "' .I " ~ .. r m 
3 
• 
~ 
~:(f~{·!I:~··~ ; 
3 r ,. ,. <. 1 J J. l ~ .... , • j,. . c • 1. , i v' J . -e: 
~ ' , .. ! '3 ~ I ~ 
~ r " " """t .. •. , J '. J. ... ~ t ;. '( ~ ;::. "t. r : 
~ 
. . ' :r -!:, ~. J V. • 
b' - j',r: ..... __ _ __ _ .. . .. j .... : t. : • ..>,:' f. 
" "- -!: i.~' . 7 .t r ~ , ~ 
~ 
• . ~ '. J.' ' ..:: ~ , . UI·· · ~ 
y !, l r- '.. . \ ~: ~· f~~J~ ~!f~~ a~ i:; :;!~ J. ~Firi!: 1; , ~~~ 
~ ~ ~ y ~ " ' ~ .. 17 I j. ~· ,;,~ 1~ .,,' (4; .... ' II I t;~:~ito .. ". ~ ~ -;; ~. i ~.' f : r.~" .I~?:~d ~i~ ~l fi ~:i)t~~: l;n i,:./ :~ t ~~ ~ . '," 3' 
I .l •. ~ .. (. u l~r~· ·' .I!.-tl ~'.', ,. 'I ~ ' . • : " ;,;. 
(' 
c· . ~' i» '! { ttr OO' j'>'1 ,(H ''': ''!:I il: ',- (? t., \,o ';t "~''''~ \ I' ~ ."_ , 
s Te' f i 
\ f.'\!· ~' \i";'t:L!, ... tI "' "~: ;"l t, tl''3P,~ i; ,. _, t'},i ... ~; ~f:·".: " :t . . ~ .. I. ,· ~.' ·. 'ir ~:~ ~ .. ~~! IJ;., ~ (" z 
• 
y t- f ' · i . -4l,~;; 0 :~2 ? ;~ ~~ t:!.i :: ~~ l :::;' ~ ~,~~ ' ~~~~ .. ~~ f ~~ t~' C'" ~ 
0' ' ~ ' ,J • - ~ a ~ .... " ""l- I't ····,,· " "1 .. " ; ' 11.1 r; ." , .•. { . . J 0 -T . . ~. iii
;::\~~GB '" r~~~l~~ , .• " 'I'
~~; 
~r
' ,
~ 
' . "" ~k¥ ,
l 
,<t;~~~,1~[1 ''' ''.''''i 
:. r. §~~~'f'~ ~ ~ ~ 
~ :, ' ' ;.. ,)-.. ;' ~ ~ { ~ '- "(, '-.... .~ ". 
~ 
N 
0 ~:. ; ... :i. ~. ~ ~: ''1 ~. ;. !' F\ ! tJf[r:'-r~·iriJ "'I'i"" rl,_~ ~n~ •• _ tf.ntOi ~_ ... ~, !f. .. . {l~tl fj \ ~ 
~ "J' :- "1: ... '! ..J ;: f j. t :[ ;p ~ r, ; '= w . ,. : " r ~ .I; ,... 
~.P. C> '" ~ r J. 
:. I: I .j. r. ~: .: i' ! : 
:. <' j'j'i,J} 'f ~. .. ~ ; J. 1:.1 ~ ~ ' . " 
J ' -': " , £ ." loJ " 'r... t' ~;i: t.. J:!~l 
~~~·;.I'ff.~ J' r !: ~ " t L j: ... 
III -1: t \. !. t. , \f: 
Ut.' .. M r.'~.uriJ:f~ r 
'"'~~.""''W'-''''U'"'''' E.lt.o1"~......w-~'i;::U'd?-frs!C 
G...i:~'JJ~~'''' -{..,...~~~ 
li!.'''..6 _,r- 'ci';*.CW{ 'W 
:WW::""...I.lt5.f IhJ! .~'L.i 
.tr: ... ~~~t..v..~ 
1:Y'"t"".f. • . 
~~J~~~t.r.~ 
_11"i'~~t:'?~ -~~f!'"~ bT l:I ~~~.....st,.":,ot'[....'Uo..t\ •. 
1~L:..>.!.""'\....I~..:J6o""'~-1i' 
~ -47J! ~~p.t:t~kYW 
~~&l.~ .lL\bit..IJ~'L~~!-i 
_l"":~t::':~~~J1!'''''!..·.!.'' ~r 
~_t4~~V~Y'(~~U 
~~~JrlA~~I\...CY<I!ttftt...? 
~'I;!f\.l3t!n... \ ~'t,( 'tJ.i'I\.~ 
t~~\.(i?<~Itf.w~t,) 
PLATE 9. From Timothy Ely. TheFlighr info Egypt, 1995. 
"""",, rU",~<.:'1"::':hf~!;!i 
t-<..I!" ~<w<-tb<i 
-=-~~(ijl.JC"~dl th~. __ \~ ~'1f~ 
(,,:.rwl-"'KA 4.J~t..u 
"'w"« 'I..li~~1 ·tlWw..Fc,.j~"+,ifL 
.. S .... "41 
tt:a! t'(;'W ,-.;.( ~-..!"Q 
ri-'Vt.(","?"U.ri~ • ~,,~t1 \,.: ..JW'" ~"c. r...JI riW ~l t¢" E' __ l 
rt.M' '1JI'''1J.t:rQ:.A.r~ 
t~I!.t:~dJ'~u...!~ 
'-\!if- (_X"IooI.ftY-t.f ~f; 
~U!Jt",,,, W~V~~~ 
""" ... ",,<1 ' !;"<;'.t' M 
W~~1r'V~l-"'.!~ 
!:' .....,. '¥"--"'~ l!l ~r..J"""'i-i<J 
Traces 79 
an event that preceded it: a thought, which then took upon itself an intention. 
If writing can convey something about that event, this is due only to a conventionalized practice that has assigned meaning to marks: writing as a retracing 
of its innumerable predecessors. The title also evokes Derrida's well-known 
concept, where "trace" is not a matter of physical marking but the trace, in any 
one word, of every other word in the language system within which it finds its 
place. It is only through an invisible dynamics of comparison that a word can 
be defined; and this is true of every other word in the language system, which 
is thus left without an ultimate ground. Another way of saying this might be 
that the meaning of a word is dependent on everything it does not mean. Thus 
asemic writing-which removes language's claim to a meaning that is present, 
that is a presence-can remind us of the paradoxical nature oflanguage; and 
this can be manifested by nature. It's worth noting that in her translator's preface to Derrida's OJ Grammatology Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak has this to say 
about his use of "trace": "The reader must remind himself of at least the track, 
even the spoor, contained within the French word" (XVii). We may then recall 
the animal tracks that Cangjie "read" as signs that could be used for human 
purposes. Or more recent tracks. At the opening of his unfinished novel The 
Pale King, David Foster Wallace describes traces left in the overturned dung of 
a pasture in terms that evoke sunbaked Sumerian tablets of aligned characters: 
The pasture's crows standing at angles, turning up patties to get at the 
worms underneath, the shapes of the worms incised in the overturned 
dung and baked by the sun all day until hardened, there to stay, tiny 
vacant lines in rows and inset curls that do not dose because head never 
quite touches tail. Read these. (6) 
Similar 'trows and inset curls" are found beneath the bark of old logs, as documented in a six-part video titled Asemic Writing in the Woods. These incisions in 
the wood, like the track in the sand photographed by rawlings, are traces of a 
wormlike creature creating something that looks like writing. The video shows 
not only that writing hut also the artist retracing it, follOwing its traces with a 
pen (Figure 3.12). It is as if the artist is learning to write from an already written Book of Nature; or that she is literally highlighting the calligraphic traits to 
be found in nature. 
80 Traces 
FIGURE 3.12. Screen shot from Asem;c Writing in the Woods (2011) by E. Samigulina/Tae Ateh and Karen 
Karnak/Yuli lIyschanka. 
"Read these," urges Wallace. But how is that to be done? If it is done on 
nature's terms, can it still be called reading?-which, as Blanchot depicts it, is 
something profoundly alien to the natural world. lfit is done on our terms, will 
we not be reading into a text that was never intended to be interpreted in those 
terms? Ultimately are these traces really inviting us to read them? One answer 
is provided by Bruno Latour, who writes: 
To be accounted for, objects have to enter into accounts. If no trace is 
produced, they offer no information to the observer and will have no 
visible effect on other agents. They remain silent and are no longer actors: they remain, literally, unaccountable .... This is why specific tricks 
have to be invented to make them talk, that is, to offer descriptions of 
themselves, to produce scripts of what they are making others-humans 
or non-humans-do. (79) 
Eco-asemics is this kind of trick; it goes hunting in the natural world for scripts 
that are literal versions of what Latour intends as metaphor. And if it finds what 
Traces 81 
it is looking for, that doesn't mean that it is forcing upon nature a human agenda. 
When an eco-asemic artist tricks the natural world into giving an account of 
itself, that account is given in signs that cannot be translated by a human reader. 
It's as if natural objects inscribe themselves in a foreign language. In offering 
the promise of communication they are demanding that we pay attention to 
them, that we admit the possibility of sentience in what we usually pass over as 
insensate. Yet at the same time these objects, through their asemic illegibility, 
remind us of their otherness, their difference from our human subjectivity. If 
conventional writing demands that objects translate themselves into our terms, 
eco-asemics reverses that, demanding that we come to tenns with a language 
that is to some degree familiar as a language-but it is not our language. 
Eco-asemic art, then, is not using language, that valuable tool of the colonizing impulse, to translate the natural world into human terms. Rather, it reminds us that natural objects may have a voice of their own. It reminds us of 
this in tenns we can understand, those of communicative writing-except that 
this writing refuses to communicate, refuses to be translated into our understanding of nature. Whenever we find it in nature we lose it at the same time: 
we are left incoherent, illiterate before these cryptic signs. At the same time we 
are made aware of the ways in which a familiar literacy can mask the strangeness of natural objects. Unmasking language through eco-asemics allows us to 
at least glimpse the possibility of reading the natural world in terms other than 
our own. 
The Chinese Connection 
Henri Michaux opens his Ideograms in China by evoking Chinese characters as 
they might appear to a Westerner's eye: 
Cracks, claw marks: the very beginnings appear to have been suddenly 
checked: arrested. 
Without form, figure, or body, without contour, symmetry, or center, 
without evoking any known property whatsoever. 
Without any apparent rule of Simplification, unification, 
generalization. 
Neither stripped nor refined, lacking sobriety. 
Each seems, at first sight, as if scattered.6 
82 Traces 
To this description he immediately appends a note asserting a completely opposite view: 
What, as apparent scribble, was once compared to the tracks of insects 
or the erratic footprints of birds upon sand still conveys, unchanged, 
perfectly legible, comprehensible, and efficacious, the Chinese language, 
the oldest living language in the world. 
The assertion of perfect legibility is a curious one to be made by someone who, 
to be sure, studied Chinese-hut never got very far with it.7 As we will see later, 
Michaux's idea of what it means to be "legible" is not exactly what we might 
suppose, nor what the Chinese might suppose. In this respect he can be numbered among a long series of Westerners who-usually with little or no knowledge of the language-have speculated on the legibility of Chinese writing in 
terms reflecting their own concerns. 
Leibniz considered Chinese writing so legible that he nominated it as the 
most likely source of a universal language: "Those who know the Chinese character," he wrote, "are right to believe that it will become a universal character, 
whose written form would be understood by all the world" (290). As someone 
who had learned the rudiments of Chinese from a Jesuit (Chang 3), Leibniz 
would count himself among "those who know." What he knew, or thought he 
knew, was that Chinese writing was based on a pictorial symbolism, and this 
would allow it to communicate more effectively.8 Descartes, Francis Bacon, 
and Athanasius Kircher had much the same idea. It eventually took its most 
famous form in Ernest Fenollosa's essay "The Chinese Written Character as a 
Medium for Poetry.'· 
An art historian and a Wide-ranging philosopher, Fenollosa taught at the 
Tokyo Imperial University in the late nineteenth century, when Japan was 
modernizing; at that time he had become familiar with the Chinese culture 
and language. After his death, his widow gave his essay on Chinese characters to Ezra Pound, as someone whose concerns were attuned to Fenollosa's. 
Pound edited it in accordance with his own concerns, and in that form it had 
a major influence on modernist poetry. For Fenollosa, 
Chinese notation is something much more than arbitrary symbols. It is 
based upon a vivid shorthand picture of the operations of nature. In the 
algebraic figure and in the spoken word there is no natural connection 
between thing and sign: all depends upon sheer convention. But the 
Chinese method follows natural suggestion. 
His example is the Chinese characters for "man sees horse": 
Traces 83 
First stands the man on his two legs. Second his eye moves through 
space: a bold figure represented by running legs under an eye, a modified picture of an eye, a modified picture of running legs, but unforgettable once you have seen it. Third stands the horse on his four legs. (45) 
This is to read Chinese characters as pictograms: that is, as signs whose interpretation is based on visual resemblance to their referents. Yet only about 1 
percent of Chinese characters are pictographic (DeFrancis, Visible Speech 100). 
Scholars today understand Chinese characters to be more aptly classed as 
logograms. A logogram is a sign that stands for a whole word or concept; it can 
be contrasted to a phonogram, which is a sign that stands for a speech sound. 
Alphabets and syllabaries are made up of phonograms; many Egyptian hieroglyphs (though not alI) are logograms. The top keys of a standard keyboard 
include a series oflogograms: $, #, %, &. The psychologist Uta Frith has suggested that the first stage in a child's language acquisition is logographic: children recognize a limited number of family names or commercial signs by their 
overall visual shape; only later do they see the letters separately as elements 
that can be combined in different ways (306). Asemic 'writing, because it defies systematic decoding, is closer to logograms than to phonograms; perhaps 
this characteristic has something to do with the recurrent assertion that asemic 
works evoke a preliterate experience from childhood. 
Missing from this list of classifications-pictogram, logogram, phonogram-is the term that is most commonly applied, or misapplied, to Chinese 
characters: ideogram. Technically this term applies to any graphic symbol standing for a concept; it is not linked to any particular language, and so is readable 
transnationally. The Chinese artist Xu Bing, best known for his massive asemic 
installation Book from the Sky, has also created Book from the Ground, which 
narrates a stick figure's day entirely through internationally recognized ideograms combined with pictographic signs such as emoticons. This may be an 
84 Traces 
ironic realization of the desire for a "universal language," which Chinese was, 
for many, supposed to fulfill. 
An even more fundamental desire, though, underlies the history of the ways 
that Chinese writing was understood, or misunderstood; and that is a desire 
for difference. Chinese writing seemed to offer an alternative to the alphabetic 
system and the limits that it imposed on thought. Viewing Chinese characters 
as ideographic, Derrida suggests, allowed one to conceive of "a powerful movement of civilization developing outside of alliogocentrism" (Of Grammatology 
90). So the very concept of Chinese writing, he says, functioned as "a sort of 
European hallucination" (80). As with a hallucination, it didn't matter all that 
much that the ways in which thinkers conceived Chinese were illusory; they 
still had real effects on thought. Fenollosa's ideas about Chinese writing have 
long been disproven; yet his essay, in Pound's hands, became a powerful instrument for change. It contributed substantially to what Christopher Bush has 
described as "modernism's attempts to grasp and transform, through the language of the other, the otherness of its own language" (xxx). Such a deliberate 
estrangement from overfamiliar forms oflanguage is also an underlying aim of 
asemic art. For these artists, the right way to characterize the Chinese language 
is less important than the wrong way, anyway that will encourage them to push 
past the limits of alphabetism into an asemic alternative. 
Christian Dotremont prOVides a fascinating example of wrong-way reading. A Belgian poet who was associated with the surrealists in Paris in the early 
194Os, he went on to form, with the Danish poet Asger Jorn, the CoBrA group, 
whose name was derived from the three cities from which its members came: 
Copenhagen, Brussels, and Amsterdam. He is best known for his Logogrammes: 
ink drawings, often on large sheets of paper, that evoke writing of various kinds 
while spinning off from the linear constraints of writing in expressive forms.9 
Of the "various kinds" of writing, one was preeminent: "My language is a kind 
of Chinese," Dotremont writes. He tells the story of how he arrived at this conclusion in his essay "Signification and Sinification," written twelve years before 
he began producing his first logograms in 1962. The essay begins with a sinuous sentence fragment: 
Le train auquel nous assignons d'etre mongol, qui nous assigne devant 
la Mongolie, qui cesse d'etre moyen de locomotion pour devenir palais 
de la rencontre et de la decouverte, curieux couloir qui donne sur luimeme, serpent. 
Traces 85 
[The train which we think to be Mongolian, which puts us in Mongolia, 
which ceases being means of transport to become a palace of meeting 
and discovery,. curious corridor opening on itself, snake.] 10 
This deSCription of a train, the so-called Mongolian train that began its run with 
a leg between Paris and Brussels, was supposed to form part of a longer piece; 
but it found another destiny, not unrelated to Mongolia: 
I took the sheet with the sentence still laid down [Figure 3.13] and 
turned it over from recto to verso and then from left to right, and 
thus [Figure 3.14] 1 started reading "my sentence" vertically, in all 
transparency. 
I realized that without knowing it because I traced it horizontally in 
the first place, I had written an extremely mysterious sentence. Chinese 
characters dominated, Mongolian perhaps, Arabic also ... 
Perhaps the closest equivalent to the script Dotremont produced is the "wild 
cursive" style of Chinese writing (Figure 3.8). But to classify it in this way is to 
ignore what for its creator was the most important point: "Suddenly," he says, 
"I was facing the beyond of my own writing:' In this beyond, the distinction 
between comprehensible and incomprehensible writing is (like the physical 
page) turned upside down and around. Linguistically, Dotremont does not 
understand Chinese. When looking at a page of Chinese characters he nevertheless asserts that he does understand them, in the same way that he understands "a page of Miro's writing, a word of Arp:' In contrast, when looking at 
conventional texts he claims not to understand them at all: "I only see small 
abstract spots. I don't even manage to decipher like Vinci the wall of certain 
newspapers and posters:' He is alluding here to Leonardo da Vinci's assertion 
that if a painter wants to find inspiration for landscapes, grotesque faces, battle scenes, and so on, all of these can be seen in the stains on old walls (201), 
or rather in the imagination that reads these markings. The "wall" of print is 
not so fruitful. Dry and abstract, it is, Dotremont says, "like a city map: the 
bushes, trees, objects, and myself have disappeared:' Yet even when a sentence 
FIGURE 3 •13 • Signification. Christian Dotremon t's handwntlng. . Copyright Guy Dotremont. 
FIGURE 3.14. Sinification. The same h an dwriting reversed and turned. Copy ri 9 ht Guy Ootremont. 
88 Traces 
is handwritten, like the one about the "Mongolian train," it requires a process 
of defamiliarization if the author is to see the true nature of his own writing. It 
must, in effect, be translated into Chinese-which in a certain sense it always 
was. Reading through the rest of the "Mongolian train" manuscript, then other 
manuscripts of his, Dotremont now saw them in a new light: uI realized that I 
always wrote Chinese." Chinese here is in fact the same thing as writing, writing 
freed from the tyranny of reference: "1 break the wall oflegibility/' he wrote, "so 
that one can see writing" (Grand HOtel 132; my translation). 
Michaux arrives at a similar understanding of the Chinese character, although by another route: a historical sequence, recounted in his Ideograms in 
China. Originally written in 1971 as a prefatory essay for Leon Tchang's La 
Calligraphie chinoise, it was then being published separately in 1975. This impressionistic account of the development of Chinese writing was based not 
only on Tchang's book but also on Michaux's own long-standing interest: he 
studied Chinese; he owned a copy of Leon Wieger's Caracteres chinois (Noland 
150); and in A Barbarian in Asia he footnotes George Owen's The Evolution 
of Chinese Writing (123). Pound considered translating Michaux's essay as a 
complement to his edition of Fenollosa's, but abandoned the project because 
of failing health. Like Fenollosa, Michaux considers Chinese characters to be a 
reflection of nature, though by the end of his essay what he means by Unature" 
is very different from what Fenollosa meant, or what he himself meant at the 
beginning. The essay, and the history it outlines, is structured like an ascending spiral. It opens with the notion of written characters that imitate naturej 
it moves progressively away from the natural to the abstract; and it concludes 
with a vision of Chinese characters as natural at a higher level, now free from 
the constraints of resemblance. 
After Michaux's opening evocation of the incoherence of Chinese to the 
untutored eye, he begins his history with its earliest script, from the end of the 
first millennium BC: the "seal script," a name given to it in reference to its use 
for official inscriptions. This was a time, he says, "when the signs still spoke, 
or nearly; when, already allusive, they revealed-rather than simple things or 
bodies or materials-groups, ensembles, situations:' This distinction between 
things and situations puts Michaux closer to Fenollosa, whose idea of Chinese 
writing is often read as simply pictOrial. Yet immediately after the "man sees 
horse" example, Fenollosa corrects this misapprehension: 
Traces 89 
It might be thought that a picture is naturally the picture of a thing, and 
therefore the root ideas of Chinese are what grammar calls nouns. 
But examination shows that a large number of the primitive Chinese 
characters, even the so-called radicals, are shorthand pictures of actions 
or processes .... A true noun, an isolated thing, does not exist in nature. 
Things are only the terminal points, or rather the meeting points of actions. (45-46) 
And actions, Fenollosa goes on to assert, can take place only through objects: 
verb and noun, actions and things, are one; and they are represented as such in 
Chinese. 
But this period of clarity in the language, Michaux says, was succeeded by 
one in which "what won out was the pleasure of remaining concealed .... One 
could now readily abstract from the original reality, from the concrete and its 
closely related signs:' At this point Michaux casts an elegiac backward glance 
at the primitive script, in terms that recall Blanchot's imagining of what it was 
like for the first person who ever wrote: "Gone, now, were those archaic characters that had stirred the heart. And those signs, so palpable, that had overwhelmed their own creators and amazed their very first readers:' Yet the life 
behind the abstractions can be recovered through scholarship, through dictionaries, inventories, and etymologies; and all this can serve as an inspiration to 
one who practices what the West would call calligraphy. II This does not entail, 
however, returning to what Michaux calls "the charm of resemblance." The aim 
of Chinese writing today is "no longer to imitate, but signify nature. By strokes, 
darts, dashes:' Abstraction has now become not a betrayal of nature but a liberatory detachment. It offers a way into nature viewed not as material objects 
but as a kind of force field: 
The sign in China, today, which is no longer in any way mimetic, has 
the grace of its own impatience. It has drawn from nature its flight, its 
diversity, its inimitable way of knowing how to bend, rebound, redress 
itsel£ 
Like nature, the Chinese language does not draw any conclusions of 
its own, but lets itselfbe read. Its meager syntax leaves room for guesswork, for creativity, leaves space for poetry. Out of the multiple issues 
the idea. 
90 Traces 
This concluding statement has applications beyond Chinese writing. In his 
Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis Freud uses the example of Chinese to 
explain how the language of dreams-which he has earlier compared to a pictographic script-can be read by the analyst despite its "meager syntax." Chinese 
has practically no grammar, he asserts: "Thus the language consists, one might 
say, solely of the raw material, just as our thought-language is resolved by the 
dream-work into its raw material and any expression of relations is omitted" 
(231). Yet Chinese "lets itselfbe read" according to context. Indeed, the fact 
that its grammatical relations are not specified but implied results in a richness, 
a resonance, that translation into Western languages finds difficult to capture. 
So, for Michaux, Chinese has developed to the point that it is no longer a 
matter of evoking, through signs, the lineaments of the external world. Rather, 
the lines on the page-strokes, darts, dashes-now express "interior gestures" that are not merely personal but also can be seen as informing nature 
as a whole. Chinese characters, especially when produced by the pen or the 
brush, have an elan that can express forces beyond their referents. All this of 
course says more about Michaux's own practice of writing and of reading than 
it does about the Chinese. Indeed, Michaux's account of the development of 
Chinese writing is similar to an account of his own development given in Saisir, 
translated by Richard Sieburth as Grasp. As discussed in chapter 2, he begins 
with the desire to create a bestiary, but soon becomes obsessed with insects. 
Sieburth describes what happens next: 
As the drawings evolve from their insect stage into vaguely anthropomorphic fragments (heads, legs, torsos, severed arms), they waver 
between figuration and disfiguration, aggregation and disaggregation, 
leap into a series of balletic ideograms, then, toward the end of the 
book, finally mutate into lines of runes or filigree strands of some still 
undeciphered language. (Stroke by Stroke n.p.) 
In this book, then, Michaux records his progression from pictorial signs to 
spontaneous asemic lines, whose contours evoke an "undeciphered language" 
reminiscent of Chinese. Yet despite his study of Chinese characters, Michaux 
never aimed to imitate them. Rather, Chinese writing encouraged him in his 
own evolution toward creating forms freed from reference or resemblance. 
What the West desires from Chinese, then, can range from universallegi-
Traces 91 
bility to a liberating illegibility, an interpretive range that is facilitated by ignorance of the language. If the term asemic applies to any writing that one can't 
read, Chinese will be asemic to most, and can be responded to accordingly. 
What happens, though, when Chinese artists themselves produce asemic work? 
We have already seen one example in Cui Fei, who is preoccupied with the 
relation of Chinese writing to nature. Xu Bing and Wenda Gu, in contrast, are 
preoccupied with Chinese culture. Both artists have created massive installations of Chinese characters that defy attempts to read them, even while these 
are presented through meticulously traditional methods. 
Wenda Gu's first solo exhibition, in 1986, showed enormous Chinese characters that appeared to be archaic seal script but were fakes, made by omitting 
or adding certain strokes or by fusing elements not ordinarily brought together. 
These signs often hovered ominously over a diminished landscape executed 
in the traditional medium of ink drawing (Figure 3.15). Unable to read the 
characters, the authorities suspected that they concealed a subversive message 
and shut the exhibit down. The students at the art college protested this move 
and threatened to bring the works out into the street. Finally the exhibition 
was reopened, but only professionals were allowed to view it. The authorities 
were not entirely wrong in their interpretation of this work: Gu has agreed with 
the suggestion that his pseudocharacters might be taken as rebellious gestures 
against the uses made of language during the Maoist era (Cateforis 146). Yet 
his work then and now is not merely counterpropaganda. In the 1980s, along 
with learning seal script and practicing traditional ink painting, he was reading 
LudWig Wittgenstein and Bertrand Russell on the nature of language; and all 
of this came together in his fake seal script. Genuine seal script, of course, was 
just as indecipherable to most Chinese as the fake version. For Westerners too, 
seal script was indecipherable-but not in the same way. So Gu was playing 
what he calls a "double game": Chinese viewers would see in seal script "the 
mythos of a lost history," while non-Chinese would accept it as the product of 
an "exotic" culture (Leung and Kaplan 90). "For me," Gu said in a 2011 interview, "language represents a culture, just as writing does." That his characters 
are unreadable reflects the fact that "our knowledge is limited by our written 
language .... There are many unknowns [and] these are like unreadable characters, meaningless characters:' Yet these characters, he asserted, can represent 
new possibilities for "imagination beyond the limitation of the language." 
FIGURE 3.15. Wenda Gu, Pseudo-Characters Series: Contemplation of the World, 1984 (detail). Ink 
on paper, 247.3 x 182.9 cm. Copyright Wenda Gu Studio. Collection of Zhen Guo. 
Traces 93 
Unreadable writing is an important component in Gu's series of installations titled The United Nations Project; human hair is another. The writing in 
fact is made up of hair-which one might see as an unexpected response to 
Brian Rotman's call to bring the body back into language. In each national site 
the material for the work is provided by that country's barbershops; and the 
form taken by the work reflects the cultural history of that locale. The title of 
Gu's China Monument: Temple of Heaven, for instance (Figure 3.16), evokes 
one of the holiest religious sites in China, first built in 1420 AD during the 
Ming dynasty. The furnishings in the middle of the installation are in the Ming 
style, but with a difference: in the seat of each of the chairs is a screen showing 
images of the sky-a "heaven video" as Gu calls it. The space is enclosed, but 
not confined, by semitransparent curtains upon which are sewn letters made of 
hair: fake seal script combined with various other pseudolanguages (English, 
Hindi, Arabic, and synthesized English-Chinese). In this case the hair does not 
come from China alone, but has been collected from hundreds of barbershops 
around the world. There is here an implied call for global unity based on a 
shared humanity, a call that must nevertheless be integrated with the specificity 
of the cultural references. The letters of hair express a similar tension between 
the natural and the cultural. Recognizable as certain types of writing, they defy 
attempts to read them in any orthodox way. For Gu, this inability to understand 
is paradoxically the first step toward understanding: "The miswritten language," 
he says, "symbolizes 'misunderstanding' as the essence of our knowledge concerning the universe and material world." To realize this is to accept a commonality that underlies the differences between languages and cultures. Such 
a realization is encouraged by the meditative setting: the restrained traditional 
furnishings, the (distinctly nontraditional) video images of a tranquil sky, and 
background music played on the bronze bells of the bianzhong, an ancient 
Chinese musical instrument. As well, the sheer scale of the work, combined 
with the strangeness of the surrounding script, creates a feeling of sublimity. All 
this contributes to Gu's stated aim: to open possibilities for the imagination 
that go beyond differences oflanguage and culture. 
An effect of sublimity is also produced by Xu Bing's massive installation 
Tianshu, or Book from the Sky (Figure 3.17), undoubtedly the best-known work 
of asemic art. Upon entering the installation, the viewer is surrounded by writing. It covers the enormous looping scrolls suspended above, the oversize panels 
94 Traces 
FIGURE 3.16. Wenda Gu, United Nations-China Monument: Temple of Heaven, 1997-98. Commissioned by 
the Asia Society, New York. Photograph by Min Jiang. Copyright Wenda Gu Studio. 
to the sides, and the sea of open books on the floor. Indeed, the reiterated 
curves of the open volumes have a hypnotic wavelike effect. The books are exquisite examples of classic bookmaking. Bound in blue, the traditional color 
for books of the Imperial House, they have been printed using hand-carved 
wooden movable type. The typeface, which Xu Bing selected after extensive 
research, is in a style commonly used in the late Ming dynasty.12 'The pages 
are laid out in the recognizable formats of encyclopedic works: tables of contents, titles, subheadings, quotations, annotations, glossaries, and a consistent 
numbering system. Overall, the installation might be taken as a monumental 
celebration of Chinese print culture, an interpretation that would come more 
easily to people who cannot read Chinese. For any attempt to read the open 
volumes results in a profoundly unsettling frustration. 'The books are filled with 
Traces 95 
asemic characters designed by Xu Bing in perfect conformity with the principles that govern existing characters, but they defy any attempt to read them. 
They were created using new combinations of the five basic strokes of Chinese 
writing, or standard semantic elements combined with meaningless ones. In 
this way four thousand new characters were created; Xu Bing chose this number because it is a common estimate of the number of characters known by the 
average literate person. Moreover, as Lydia Liu has pOinted out, "the majority 
of Xu Bing's Tianshu characters range between fifteen and twenty-two strokes. 
The character with the least number of strokes contains three strokes and the 
character with the most has more than thirty-seven. This is consistent with 
the pattern we observe across the existing data in the Chinese writing system. 
The extraordinary closeness that his characters bear to conventional written 
characters can thus be mathematically accounted for" (73). Xu Bing spent four 
years carving these characters into wood blocks to make the movable type. At 
one point, having discovered that his characters were three millimeters too big 
for the format, he redid two thousand of them. The books were printed at a 
factory specializing in high-quality reproductions of antique books. 
The contrast between the meticulous accuracy of the books and the disconcerting illegibility of their contents creates the effect that Xu Bing set out to 
achieve. The work, he tells us, arose out of a profound weariness with culture 
itsel£ During the liberated period after the Cultural Revolution ended, he says, 
I read so much and participated in so many cultural activities that my 
mind was in a state of chaos. My psyche had been clogged with all sorts 
of random things. I felt uncomfortable, like a person suffering from starvation who had just gorged himsel£ It was at that point that I considered 
creating a book that would clean out these feelings. (''Artist's View" 99) 
That the artist chose to express his critique through a book was almost inevitable; for, as Maurice Blanchot has asserted, "Culture is linked to the book. The 
book as repository and receptacle of knowledge is identified with knowledge" 
(471). So the four volumes that, in multiple copies, make up the single overwhelming Book from the Sky bristle with all the apparatuses of a scholarly work, 
recognizable as such despite their illegibility. The encyclopedic ambition of 
the work is reflected in its original title, which may be translated as Mirror to 
FIGURE 3.17. Xu Bing, Book from the Sky, 1987-91. Mixed-media installation: hand-printed books and 
scrolls printed from blocks inscribed with "false" Chinese characters. Installation view at Crossings! 
Traversees, National Gallery of Canada, Ottawa, 1998. Copyright Xu Bing Studio. 
Traces 97 
Analyze the World: The Century's Final Volume. The first part of this title echoes 
that of certain encyclopedic works from remote periods of Chinese history 
(Liu 67); the second part refers to the dates of the work's creation, 1987-91. 
The artist discarded this title in favor of the one by which the work is now 
known, Tianshu. The final title was provided by a viewer who did not intend it 
as a compliment: in colloquial Chinese, tianshu means "writing that makes no 
sense." However, in a book from the sky, or from heaven, this absence of sense 
could also be linked to the glossolalia (or in this case, glyptolalia) of religiOUS 
revelations. As Roger T. Ames has pointed out, in certain Daoist scriptures, 
tianshu is the first of eight kinds of esoteric writing: "a style of complex writing 
that in prizing the mysterious and concealing what is most real, befuddles the 
eyes" (37). The title, then, is as undecidable as the work itsel£ which generates many meanings because it is itself without a meaning. Xu Bing comments: 
"People have so many perspectives on Book from the Sky because the work itself 
is empty. The work does not present any clear message" ('~tist's View" 99). 
Given the asemic nature of the work, a useful gloss on the artist's statement 
would be Roland Barthes's awareness of the relation between writing and emptiness, an awareness fostered by his travels in the East. To return to a passage 
quoted earlier: "Writing is, after all, in its way, a satori) " Barthes says. lilt creates 
an emptiness of language. And it is also an emptiness of language which constitutes writing" (Empire 4). This is supported by the very fact that Xu Bing was 
able to create a shadow vocabulary of the same number of characters known by 
literate readers. He was able to do this because the five basic kinds of strokes 
that make up any Chinese character, however complex it may be, are themselves without meaning: they are asemic. They take on meaning only when arranged in certain configurations, which then become familiar cultural entities. 
John Cayley's comments are pertinent here: 
Characters are the graphic atoms of Chinese writing, of the Chinese 
system of inscription, by which I mean that if you have anything "less" 
than a character what you have is not an atom oflanguage but a mere 
sub-atomic assemblage of graphic marks .... [Xu Bing] was fortunate in 
the "atomic structure" of his language in that it has many atoms, a large 
set of distinct atomic elements with elaborate and accessible internal 
structures. Thus, it was relatively easy for him to create new unreadable 
atoms, consonant with the existing atomic system. (29) 
98 Traces 
The elaborate internal structures of Chinese characters are material and graphic, 
consisting of strokes deployed within a roughly square space. Cayley goes on to 
compare the atomic and subatomic nature of Chinese writing to the relatively 
impoverished graphics of Western writing: "The 'atoms' of our predominant 
system of inscription, which is alphabetic, are relatively few in number and, 
graphically, they are composed from a relatively small number of marks and 
differences" (29). 
In a subsequent work, Xu Bing fused these characteristics of Chinese and 
Western writing systems. His Square Word Calligraphy of 1994 (Figure 3.18) 
seems at first glance to be made up of Chinese characters. If one takes the time 
to look more closely, the "charactersn reveal themselves as English words whose 
letters have been arranged in a squared format, with some serving as "internal 
structuresn and all of them rendered through the traditional strokes of Chinese 
calligraphy. 'Thus what at first may appear illegible and "exotic" to a Western 
viewer suddenly comes into focus as familiar. In contrast, Chinese viewers 
would expect to be able to read these characters, but find that they cannot. The 
Square Word Calligraphy installation takes the form of a fully equipped classroom, complete with desks, two manuals beautifully printed in Square Word 
Calligraphy, inkstones, brushes, and an instructional video. Visitors who are 
willing to take the time will experience a thorough and meticulous training 
in classical Chinese calligraphy, emphasizing such things as correct posture, 
method of holding the brush, the order in which the strokes are to be made, 
and the quality to be aimed for in each one. At the same time, the students 
will always be aware that what they are learning is something that they supposedly already knew, English words. Those words have become defamiliarized 
through a spatial reorganization like the one to which Dotremont subjected 
his sentence about the Mongolian train. To change the physical shape of words 
from the linearity of English to the squared format of Chinese is to disrupt patterns of thought that have been inculcated to the point that they seem natural. 
As with Dotremont, this may lead to the realization that one has always written Chinese-that is, that marks, however elegant they may be, are themselves 
without meaning and become writing only through the kind of cultural shaping 
that is represented by the classroom. 
Xu Bing's calligraphy classroom enacts in microcosm many of the dynamics that characterize the Wesfs relation to Chinese writing. The artist hopes 
Iitl, .-- -:. no' 
FIGURE 3.18. Xu Bing, textbook and red line tracing book from An Introduction to Square Word 
Calligraphy, 2000. Text and tracing books, brushes, ink. Copyright Xu Bing Studio. 
100 Traces 
that Square Word Calligraphy will spread throughout the globe, and to this 
end he is creating a computer program that will convert any word entered in 
the Western alphabet into Square Word Calligraphy (Erickson 70). This does 
not make Chinese a universal language, but it does fuse it with the currently 
dominant language. And if Square Word Calligraphy becomes widespread, familiarity with it will make Chinese less exotic to Western eyes. In his instruction manual, Xu Bing promises that learning to make these characters llwill 
help us rediscover things that have been forgotten and now seem strange to us. 
For actually, these things have always belonged to us" (quoted in Erickson 70). 
Foremost among these things must be the beauty of Chinese calligraphywhich, despite Michaux's strictures against other, conventionalized versions of 
calligraphy, exemplifies in its strokes the pure expressive energy that he valued 
above either the verbal or the pictorial. The recurrent overemphaSis on Chinese 
characters that have a pictorial element perhaps has to do with the awareness 
that Chinese words are written in a spatial rather than a linear format. This suggests to poets like Pound the possibility of breaking free from the constraints 
of an all-too-familiar language. But it also suggests a breaking apart: because 
Chinese characters, from a Western viewpoint, can so easily be seen as markings floating free from any recognizable meaning, they have become inspirations for asemic art. Revelations and revisions such as these, however, are not 
confined to the West. The Chinese themselves can be brought to view their 
writing as something other, something alien. This happens when artists from 
within their own culture baflle and stimulate them through work that rewrites 
the very idea of writing. 
THREE FOR TODAY 
Michael Jacobson, Rosaire Appel, 
and Christopher Skinner 
Michael Jacobson: Action and Noise 
Creator of some of the most noteworthy work in contemporary asemic, Michael 
Jacobson is also a tireless promoter of other artists in the genre. His PostAsemic Press publishes asemic writing "and beyond"; he curated the first largescale exhibition of asemic art in the United States; I and his website The New 
Post-Literate serves as a constantly changing gallery of asemic work across a 
wide spectrum. He sees himself as the counterpart of Tim Gaze, trailblazer and 
publisher of Asemic magazine-though he takes a rather different line: "Tim 
is the calm Buddhist sage of the movement. I am the crazed-astronaut-monk 
exploring internal-space and cyberspace with the most heavily distorted writing I can muster" {Works 142).2 In 2013 Gaze and Jacobson worked together to 
produce An Anthology of Asemic Handwriting. 
It was Gaze who introduced Jacobson to the term asemic, and the movement it signified. This gave a home and a new name to what Jacobson had already been doing for years, only he called it "alien" writing.3 His practice had 
been inspired by a chance encounter with Max Ernst's Maximiliana or the fllegal 
Practice of Astronomy, which includes many pages of what we now deSignate as 
asemic characters (Plate 3). This book, Jacobson says, was "the biggest early influence on my asemic writing," and it remains "the Single work I return to most" 
(116, 147). Lettrism, Mirtha Dennisache, and the Voynich manuscript were 
other influences. l\round this time," he says, "I also became interested in the 
history of writing, especially the more visual forms of writing like hieroglyphs 
and, to be more specific, the generously beautiful Rongorongo script" (142). 
Rongorongo is in fact itself asemic, though not intentionally so. A writing 
system that seems to have evolved spontaneously and remains undeciphered 
101 
102 Three for Today 
to this day, it is Easter Island's other mystery, besides the enormous brooding 
heads for which the island is famous. Carved into irregular wooden tablets, the 
writing is laid out in bands; this may reflect less permanent versions inscribed 
between the flutings of banana leaves (Fischer 386). The glyphs consist of stylized human or animal shapes and geometrical ones. 
The asemic script of Jacobson's first novella, The Giant's Fence (Figure 4.1), 
resembles Rongorongo in a number of ways. Foremost is the fact that the writing is laid out in bands, unvarying in their width and their ruler-sharp evenness. Only at rare intervals does the text break open to form boxes or circles, 
circles that enclose a center marked with a small circle around a dot. This circular configuration might allude to the primitive Finnish labyrinths known as 
Jatulintarha, whose name Jacobson adopted as the original title of his manuscript. In English, this translates as The Giant's Yard; Jacobson has preferred 
Fence, as a better fit for his even, dense bands of writing. As unvarying as those 
bands is the thickness of the lines that form the characters: these are not fluctuating, breathing lines like those in Chinese calligraphy. What do fluctuate, in 
a seemingly inexhaustible variety, are the characters themselves. There are no 
evident repetitions, as there would be for a script capable of being decoded. 
Nor are there breaks between word units or even between individual characters, which often nestle into each other, protruding or receding. A Single drawn 
line is often shared by one or more characters; it's difficult to tell, in fact, when 
a line has actually ended, as opposed to having branched off or changed direction. All this produces an effect of rich tumultuousness. 
At the same time, there is something like the pictorial element of Rongorongo: "something like" because it is hardly ever explicit. Every so often a recognizable image will appear on the page, but for the most part images are only 
hinted at. Perhaps a dot or a circle will suggest an eye, a bent line will suggest a 
leg, or the script will seem to form a fish, a house, a target. These moments may 
be accounted for by the Rorschach effect, and thus would have their source in 
the viewer's imagination; but they may also be the residue of the artist's imagination. Jacobson says that The Giant's Fence is written in a "trans-symbolic" 
script, a term that becomes clearer when he describes his creative process: 
When I begin an asemic text, I will either do some automatic writing 
or snatch a shape from the surrounding environment. I start Simply and 

104 Three for Today 
develop complexity. Usually the signs begin as recognizable symbols 
that, through subsequent generations, become abstract designs whose 
origin eventually becomes obscure even to myself, the creator of the 
piece. (125) 
This indicates that a certain pictorial element is present from the beginning, 
but then becomes folded into and subsumed by the chirographic element, 
which has its own impulsion. 'Tm particularly interested," Jacobson says, "in 
exploring the moment when a simple line on a page begins to have meaning" 
(124-25). The meaning he is referring to is not semantic but gestural, as he 
goes on to explain: "It's very hard to write a gesture completely devoid of meaning or to write a gesture that's completely filled with meaning" (125). The 
drawn line extends itself between these alternatives; it develops in the way that 
Klee and Michaux recognized, with a certain will of its own. The script of The 
Giant's Fence, then, hovers between two determinants: the kind of linear associations that produce doodles, and the will of an artist conscious of his influences and his intentions. The first determinant accounts for the copious variety 
of the characters; the second accounts for the consistency that identifies them 
as belonging to the same graphic family. 
That family is related to urban graffiti, which according to Jacobson is the 
other major influence on The Giant's Fence, besides Rongorongo. Especially 
when the line closes upon itself, it produces the overlapping chunky units that 
are commonly found in graffiti. On city walls such units are not always letters, even stylized letters; there is an asemic graffiti that connects to Jacobson's 
asemic novella. The Giant's Fence is thus drawn simultaneously from contemporary and primitive cultures, while creating a distinctive idiom of its own. 
Action Figures, Jacobson's second asemic novella (Figure 4.2), does something similar: it is "a collection of street hieroglyphs," he says, and 'fprobably 
my most gentle and accessible text" (125). That is because the signs here are 
recognizable figures, and so are more easily read as representing narrative actions. '~ction figures" was of course the name given to jOinted plastic figures 
marketed to boys, in order to avoid calling them "dolls." The prototype was 
G.!. Joe, which appeared in 1964 and was followed by numerous heroes and 
superheroes. Jacobson has hijacked the term to describe the rhythmiC variety 
of postures by figures that are equally varied. Only their blocky Cffeet" remain 
Three for Today 105 
relatively constant; hands are extended at intervals; but the upper part of the 
body might be anything. The figures progress across an even frieze like band, 
an expansion of the bands that contain the writing of The Giant's Fence. There 
is a sense of movement, but it does not arise from the elan of the strokes that 
form the figures, as it does in Michaux's Mouvements. The linear idiom here is 
jerky, crooked: its shifts of direction create blocky outlines with an excessive 
number of corners and projections. Following the publication of Action Figures} 
Jacobson put on hold a projected third book of asemic hieroglyphs because 
"the style reminded me too much of Keith Haring's work" (120 )-and indeed 
we can see a tendency in that direction here, with both artists indebted to the 
stylizations of graffiti. Jacobson, however, adds the hieroglyphic element-that 
is, the sense that all this is meant to be a version of writing. It is very much a 
pictorial writing because of the gestural energy of the characters as well as a few 
quite explicit images: a figure being drawn up by rays into a flying saucer (92) j 
an American flag on a television set, and next to it, a figure clearly in the process of hanging itself, noose draped around its neck (107). For the most part, 
though, the energy of these action figures arises, as in The Giant's Fence, from 
Jacobson's astonishingly fertile linear imagination. Again, despite the stylistic 
coherence there seems to be no repetition in the figures. This heads off any 
possibility of a code to be deciphered, like that in the Sherlock Holmes story 
··'The Adventure of the Dancing Men." These dancing men, women, animals, 
and god-knows-what speak only to each other, if that. We are allowed to watch, 
to wonder, and to read whatever narrative comes to us as a result. 
Unlike in a conventional narrative, though, there is no "sense of an ending," as Frank Kermode has called it: the feeling, even before the last page, that 
things are drawing inevitably to a close. Action Figures just stops. This is different from The Giant's Fence, which is framed by a formal graphic configuration, both at its beginning and at its end. In fact, it is the same configuration: 
two concentric circles of asemic writing surrounding the small circle with a 
dot in its center, and supported by symmetrical wings of asemic writing that 
extend on either side and evoke a base. This configuration from the opening 
of The Giants Fence appears again at its close, upside down and reversed. Yet 
these framing devices seem entirely arbitrary: there is no sense, in the text that 
precedes the end, of an acceleration or a change in the writing. Judging from 
this example, Paul Valery's often-quoted (or rather, paraphrased) dictum that a 
FIGURE 4.2. Michael Jacobson, page from Action Figures, 201 1. 
Three for Today 107 
work is never finished, only abandoned, seems to apply particularly to asemic 
writing. Despite what I have called the narrative elements that can appear in 
asemic works, we are unlikely to find in them anything like a narrative shape. 
Of course we cannot actually see the shape of a narrative: it is a mental construction, a translation of the message-bearing words of the text, which have 
accumulated line by line, into a spatial configuration. Moreover, it is a spatial 
configuration the significance of which is difficult to sum up, even though it 
is apprehended. The aftereffect of a whole novel, then, may have the force of a 
single gesture. In this regard all the articulate words of a text lead us in the end 
to something that cannot be articulated, a shape like that of an asemic character, enigmatic but charged with significance. 
Jacobson produces action of another sort in his animations of asemic writing. This is not a matter of making figures dance, or indeed of figures at all. 
Rather, a work like Mynd Eraser uses something more closely related to conventional handwriting, but the lines on the page twitch and contort in rapid-fire 
looped sequences. The work exists in two versions. The first version, posted 
on Jacobson's online gallery The New Post-Literate, is described as an "Asemic 
Kinetic gif blog novel (blovel)" in nine chapters, each chapter consisting of 
five to seven gif frames. It opens with bold angular lines of flickering asemic 
writing. In the third frame, though, Jacobson introduces a strobe effect, with 
the black lines not only twitching but alternately changing to an acid green. In 
the fourth frame, flickering black lines on white change to white lines on black. 
These techniques fully justify the warning at the head of the work: MAY CAUSE 
SEIZURES. Certainly in some sense the mind of the viewer is erased, emptied of 
anything but this frantic scribbling. However, an adjoining note indicates that 
mynd is not just a spelling affectation but the Icelandic word for picture, image, 
or film. As Mynd Eraser progresses, the configurations and colOrings become 
increasingly rich-without, however, letting up for a moment on the rhythmic 
intensity. This is not writing that will lie down peacefully in lines; it aggreSSively 
jumps about on the page, jumps out at its viewers, assaults them. Asemic writing,Jacobson has said, "captures the technO-anxiety & information overload of 
post-literate culture better than traditional forms of literary expression" (118). 
This does not apply to The Giants Fence or Action Figures, but it is certainly true 
of a work like Mynd Eraser. 
'The second version of Mynd EraseTj found on YouTube, is described as the 
108 Three for Today 
"full novella with spoken word:' It is certainly fuller-thirteen chapters rather 
than nine-but it is hardly accurate to refer to the «spoken word," since there 
are no words but rather a guttural sort of chanting, at times reaching up into 
high-pitched squeals, modulating later into electronically produced sounds. 
This kind of sound track is not necessarily something superadded to asemic 
writing, but is already, perhaps, implied by it. In 1998 Jim Leftwich, in a letter 
to Tim Gaze, wrote: 
i have been attempting to read some of my asemic works aloud, it's 
surprising what occurs, a sort of mutated letteral growl and hiss, recognizable letter sounds which segue in and out of asemic vocalizations, i 
have no interest at all in performance, but i may get around to making a 
tape at some point, but i need a little more practice before i'll be willing 
to do that, it's interesting, though, that i'm finding the asemic texts to be 
something other than silence, they lack signification, which is probably 
their strongest allure, but i think they are not lacking in sound. (Asemic 
Writing 3) 
Jacobson is, then, attempting to give a sonic body to what is already implied in 
his asemic writing. As that writing is here a visually aggressive one, it is paired 
with a sound track of harrowing noise, or rather noise music. That term is of 
course an oxymoron: as Paul Hegarty has noted, when noise is put to use by 
composers it can no longer be fully noise ("Residue;' quoted in Priest 132). 
Despite a historical allusiveness that ranges from throat singing to electronica, 
though, most auditors will categorize these sounds as noise: they assault us, 
and are intended to. They correspond to the visual assault made upon the 
viewer by the aggressive twitch and flicker of the asemic writing. 
This pairing of asemic writing with noise is not an isolated case. "Asemic 
writing relates to noise music in a way similar to the beat writers' fascination 
with jazz," says Jacobson; "many asemic writers listen to noise music and even 
create it themselves" (140). The most obvious parallel between the two is that 
in their respective media both are generally considered to be without meaning. Noise in fact is often described as that which blocks a meaning that would 
otherwise be audible: "the interference that breaks up a telephone call, the 
scratch on a musical recording, the hiss of the mechanical apparatus that allows for playback of an audio recording" (Forrest, n.p.). This is not, however, 
Three for Today 109 
how asemic writing operates; it is not blocking an already existent meaning that 
is struggling to get out. Nor, if we push it a little further, is it really how noise 
operates. As early as 1929, the composer Henry Cowell, in an essay titled "The 
Joys of Noise," pointed out that noise is an inescapable component of music: 
when the sound of a violin, for instance, is analyzed it is found to consist not 
exclusively of periodic (that is, musical) vibrations but also of accompanying 
vibrations that are irregular. These are part of the tonal experience of the instrument. When vintage recordings were remastered using the new CD technology, as they were in the case of the great tango masters, all noise was eliminated. The result was the removal, along with hisses and scratches, of the depth 
and emotional resonance of the originals. "It is noise that binds the signal," 
says Aden Evens; "noise is the reservoir of sense, the depth in which sounds 
connect to each other, the difference whose modulation is Signal" (15). Music, 
then, is modulated noise. Asemic writing functions like noise to the degree that 
it forgoes the signal function of writing. But it functions like noise music in that 
it frames and draws attention to what would normally be ignored or avoided, 
the matrix that makes writing possible at all. 
Asemic writing reminds us that writing is material, that it depends on a 
materiality that is meaningless in itsel£ It is aSSigned meaning (which is not 
material) by convention and habit; and it does this by graphic configurations 
alone. Those configurations can be shifted, as Xu Bing shifted the components 
that make up Chinese characters. In the case of Mynd Eraser we watch the configurations shift before our eyes, taking on a disconcerting life of their own. 
They act out a speeded-up, almost cartoony version of what writing systems 
do. Instead oflying docile on the page, content to pass on the writer's thoughts, 
writing actively shapes those thoughts. That shaping is often enough a misshaping, which proceeds according to writing's material exigencies and the patterns that have evolved with the language. In contrast to the vague images that 
characterize a writer's preliminary thinking, and in contrast to the vagueness 
of a reader's associative response, writing is definite, literally incisive. It began 
as incisions on clay tablets, and it retains that sharpness in the black-on-white 
grapheme. As Flusser describes it, that sharpness is all too prone to violence: 
Let etymology bear witness once again. The English to write (that in fact 
means "scratch," as does the Latin "scribere") reminds us that scratching 
110 Three for Today 
and tearing come from the same stem. The scratching stylus is an incisor, 
and one who writes inscriptions is an incising tiger; he tears images to 
pieces. Inscriptions are the torn pieces, the cadavers of images; they are 
images that fell victim to the murderous incisor teeth of writing. (Does 
Writing Have a Future? 14) 
So, concealed by habit, there is a certain terror in any text. Jacobson's animation 
pulls away the veil of habit to show us something like Flusser's vision of text. 
The mynd that is a film of writing in action assaults the mind, erases its sense of 
autonomy, and reveals a power in writing that we may have suspected but never 
really saw. 
Rosaire Appel: Comics and Notations 
In all my work I am exploring the betweens of reading/looking/ 
listening. My subject is, basically, visual language. Using a combination 
of abstract comics and asemic writing, I develop sequences that suggest 
rather than nail down situations, locations, and moods. (Sample Book) 
So states Rosaire Appel, the most versatile and exploratory of today's asemic 
artists, who constantly tries out new methods and experiments with new 
materials. We have already encountered her Beach Language-photographs 
of chance configurations of sticks and debris that evoke Chinese characters. 
Another example of her unusual vision is the short video Liquid Calligraphy, 
which is posted on YouTube. The introduction reads, (fA piece of the Hudson 
River tries to pass as asemic writing." What follows are sinuous shifting lines 
that do almost seem like a script, liberated from fixity. What they really are is 
the high-contrast reflection of a piling in moving water, turned ninety degrees 
and accompanied by noise music reminiscent of river traffic. Appel uses a wide 
range of artistic methods: xerography, digital art, video, photography, rubbings, 
freehand drawing, aleatory practices, erasure (of everything but the punctuation marks), and canceling out (producing something like Man Ray's Poem; 
Figure 3.2). Consequently, she cannot really be pinned down or classified. 
But we can take up the cue that she gives us in her comments above about her 
foregrounding of(fabstract comics and asemic writing" in order to consider the 
relationship between these two modes, not just in Appel's work but generally. 
Three for Today 111 
Like asemic \\Triting, abstract comics existed before they were given that 
name. Andrei Molotiu (himself an asemic artist) consolidated the genre in 
2009 with his important book Abstract Comics: The Anthology. For that book, 
he not only collected existing examples but also commissioned new ones; and 
his blog Abstract Comics has kept the momentum going. In the introduction 
to his anthology, Molotiu explains what abstract means when it is applied to 
comics: 
While in painting the term applies to the lack of represented objects in 
favor of an emphasis on form, we can say that in comics it additionally 
applies to the lack of a narrative excuse to string panels together, in favor 
of an increased emphasis on the formal elements of comics that, even in 
the absence of a (verbal) story, can create a feeling of sequential drive, 
the sheer rhythm of narrative or the rise and fall of a story arc. (n.p.) 
It is not enough to eliminate the speech balloons, then; for many comics are 
wordless, acting out their stories by a kind of pantomime, as in Jim Woodring's 
Frank, for instance. Abstract comics may evoke narrative forces, but they are 
never mere illustrations of a story. The sense of sequence, motion, and development that is intrinsic to ordinary comics arranged in panels is freed, in abstract 
comics, from the task of conveying a narratively determined meaning. In their 
own way, then, abstract comics are asemic. 
One example may make this clearer: a piece by Andy Bleck that is included 
in Molotiu's anthology (Plate 4). Not nearly as abstract as many are, it executes 
a play on the panel format-a common tactic in abstract comics. Here the 
panels are morphed into cartoony organic shapes joined by ligaments and supported at the bottom by rudimentary feet. Within the panels there is a sequence 
where figures become progressively more like script, indeed like asemic script. 
In the top left panel, a humanoid figure-it could be a relative of Jacobson's 
action figures-reacts to a more abstract one, which then seems to attack and 
absorb it. At the end we have a configuration reminiscent of Arabic calligraphy, 
which is also comparable to certain works by Dotremont (Figure 5.3). 
Abstract comics abandon the story line, but it took some time before Appel 
did so. She had studied draWing and painting in the late 1960s at the newly 
formed New York Studio School, but then turned to writing. Two of her novels 
were published by FC2 in the early 1990s: Mabel in Her Twenties and transiT 
112 Three for Today 
were influenced by writers like Gertrude Stein and Alain Robbe-Grillet. The 
aim of both novels was, in Appel's words, "to keep a quality of unexpectedness, 
to create a verbal object that could be re-read/re-encountered without being 
used up" (personal communication, November 30, 2017). In pursuit of this 
goal she moved from verbal to visual narratives. Eventually, inspired by the contact sheets for photographs that she was making at that time, she added frames 
and segments within these works. The relation of this practice to comic-book 
art was brought home to her through a 2006 exhibition at the Jewish Museum 
in New York, Masters of American Comics: 
There was tremendous energy in those framed black and white pagesI wanted to turn them upside down to see them abstractly without 
reading either the figures or the words. I like the look of comics. I like 
how the gap between frames can be slight as a sigh or deep as a black 
hole. But once words appear, I'm pulled away from looking. This push/ 
pull energy between words and images, this conflict between looking 
and reading, interests me. Issues oflanguage, both visual and verbal, are 
and have been the foundation of my practice. ("Interview") 
Appel does not always include asemic writing in her abstract comics, but 
when she does the affinity between the two modes is clear, even when nothing else is. As an example, take a page from her book You Have the Right to 
Remain Silent, subtitled An Unclaimed Nightmare (Figure 4.3). Its use of panels 
links it to comic books to some degree, but the overall effect is more akin to 
certain practices in traditional Japanese books: "limited color, simplified line, 
sequential development of some kind of narrative" ("Interview"). An exhibit 
of such books at the New York Public Library helped to point her toward the 
comic-book format-all the more because the exhibit was held at the same 
time as Masters of American Comics. The asemic writing on this page is evocative of Japanese characters, though these are not consistently aligned in the 
usual vertical format: the top panel places them within bulbous shapes that 
might remind a viewer of speech balloons. Another such shape, in the middle 
panel, contains a purely visual delineation, even though its position above a 
shadowy group of figures would in a conventional comic imply their speech. A 
shadowy figure in the bottom panel might be extending a dark cloak. The fact 
that some of the shapes here evoke human figures does not mean that we have 
FIGURE 4.3. Rosaire Appel, page from You Have the Right to Remain Silent, 2012. 
114 Three for Today 
left the territory of abstract comics; for according to Molotiu, the genre can 
include "those comics that contain some representational elements, as long as 
those elements do not cohere into a narrative or even into a unified narrative 
space" (Abstract Comics "Introduction"). In any case the shapes are indefinite, 
and my readings of them are speculative, made within a territory of"betweens." 
As opposed to what Appel calls "functional stories;' her versions, she writes, 
"emerge and dissolve back into themselves, leaving energy traces in the margins" (Untranslated 5). 
In the short essay "Chairs and Pigeons," Appel expresses this dynamic of 
emerging and dissolving through the image of a cloud. She extends to the indeterminate forms of asemic writing the common tendency to assign recognizable shapes to indeterminate cloud forms: 
What of the marks on these pages? Looks like language-but doesn't 
smell or taste like it .... Are these pre-words? Post-words? They are 
un-words, they resist wording. Their language is non-historical: with 
every reading you start from zero. 
Still, these are not private, incommunicable, unsignmable, nonsuggestive, indecipherable gestures. Visual linguistics are a shared trait. 
You see a chair in a cloud, I see a chair. We communicate. Yet it doesn't 
mean there's a chair in the cloud. You see a chair, I see a pigeon, still 
there's nothing to argue over. A cloud is still a cloud, its form is ordinarily wordless. (9) 
Asemic writing in this view is opposed to the categorizing tendency of words, 
to the drive for precision, for the mot juste. Asemic scripts are generative, 
expansive. That doesn't mean, though, that they are completely unmoored 
from any governing principles whatsoever: a cloud is still a cloud, and whatever thought processes take place in its viewer begin with the cloud's shape, 
however momentary that may be. So it is with the marks on the page, whether 
these are the "unwords" of asemic writing or what Molotiu calls the "formal 
elements" of abstract comics. In both cases, whatever is generated in the viewer's mind arises out of a material configuration that simultaneously anchors the 
response and elicits it. 
A comic-book narrative may be driven by words, but it is always supported 
by a visual language; and some of the components of comic-book language 
Normal cussing 
Three for Today 115 
A uariation using obstensibly obliterated 
epithets. 
FIGURE 4.4. Cussing. From Mort Walker, The Lexicon of Comic ana, 1980. Copyright 1980 Comicana, Inc. 
Reprinted with permission. 
have striking affinities with asemic writing. In 1980 Mort Walker, the creator of 
Beetle Bailey, Hi and Lois, and numerous other comic strips, published a guide 
to cartooning conventions titled The Lexicon of Comicana. On the opening page 
he reminds us that "there are many types of writing besides the modern alphabet system"; and he presents the visual conventions of comic book art as a symbology. Familiar techniques are categorized, illustrated, and assigned whimsical 
names. The category of emanata, for instance, includes a variety of signs emanating from a character's internal state, such as plewds-droplets of sweat produced by tension-or the disorienting, spiraling squeans and spuds of drunkenness. An especially rich category is maladicta: cursing or, as Walker puts 
it, cussing. Within it we find jams (spirals), quimps (planets), nittIes (stars), 
and grawlixes (scribbles). In an example taken from Walker's book (Figure 
4.4), the left-hand cussing is made up of recognizable jams, quimps, and nittles; the right-hand cussing is entirely made up of grawlixes. Unsurprisingly, 
one comic-book critic, Marc van Elburg, has juxtaposed these markings with 
those of Michaux's Narration (Figure 2.1). Both grawlixes and emanata can be 
116 Three for Today 
described in much the same way that Michaux described his asemic writing: 
as visible gestures on the page that reflect the "pre-gestures" of interior emotions. Fundamentally, though, the visual language of comics is less a matter of 
incidental conventions like grawlixes than of a certain syntax of composition: 
the placement and size of figures; the play of black areas and oflines; shifts in 
perspective; changes in panel size and configuration.4 When such elements are 
freed from the demands of narrative representation, they manifest a power that 
is all their own. Abstract comics allow artists to investigate this power in all its 
varieties through the combination of compositional elements. 
For an exploratory artist like Rosaire Appel, it is natural to ask what effects will result from various combinations. One book of hers in particular 
does this: the 2016 adds. "Make a mark and add another" it begins; and this 
deceptively simple procedure is used to produce characters, configurations, 
patterns, and rhythms. Appel's marks are made with felt-tip pens, all with the 
same broad nib, but with a full range of bright colors. "I make a series of orange marks across the pages, then add a red mark to each, then a green then 
the blue. It's like a game. It's a way to grow things" (personal communication, November 30, 2017). On some pages the individual marks used in the 
composition are presented separately, in a small cartouche; this emphasizes 
their status as elemental units. This book is then a theoretical investigation of 
"formal elements"-of the properties of marks when they are combined with 
other marks in various ways. The first page of adds (Plate 5) begins with writing, but the next page moves on to drawing: 
As in writing, so in drawing: the kinds of marks-how they move, 
where they go-familiar or strange, connected or separate-create 
something to be read. 
But it happens so fast you don't notice: seeing happens before reading. 
Appel has deSigned adds to make us notice what is happening when marks 
are made on a page. Her aim is akin to Jennifer Bartlett's in Rhapsody or that of 
Josef Albers in Homage to the Square, though of course on a much more intimate scale: all these artists are exploring, in a systematic way, the possibilities 
of the media in which they work. At intervals Appel's marked pages become 
reminiscent of asemic writing, but only as a subset of her investigation of mark-
Three for Today 117 
ing in its broad sense. When she says, "My subject is, basically, visual language," 
Appel really does mean to approach visual art as a language: "something to be 
read," and something that-as Klee and Kandinsky stress-can be generated 
out of a certain syntax ofline, shape, and color. 
The notion of "visual language" can also be applied to systems of notation, 
a term that includes writing but is not confined to it. When thinking through 
the ways in which drawing is different from writing, Tim Ingold states that writing is a notation; drawing is not. Yet he admits that writing is a special case of 
drawing, "in which what is drawn comprises the elements of a notation" (122). 
Of course, drawing can be used to represent a notation while itself not being 
one; and this is the project of asemic writing. However, asemic can be extended 
beyond writing to other forms of notation. 
Musical notation will be the first instance that comes to mind, and all the 
more readily as contemporary composers searching for more open forms-
"ghostlier demarcations, keener sounds," as Wallace Stevens has it-have created visual scores far removed from the orderly arrangement of notes on ruled 
lines. A landmark collection of these innovative scores is John Cage's 1969 
Notations, which in 2012 inspired Appel's asemic music score A Collection of See 
Songs. During her time at the New York Studio School, Appel had heard talks 
by Cage and by Morton Feldman, who was the school's director. When she 
later saw Cage's book, it opened to her a new territory, a new way to conceive of 
marks and their effects. There are not all that many notes in Appel's notation: 
on most of the 182 pages of See Songs, it is the five lines of the musical staff that 
are released from their stiff horizontality to curve and meander like ribbons 
(Figure 4.5). One can see a relation here to Flusser's critique of the linearity of 
writing, and the way it affects our habits of conceiving time-musical time as 
well as historical. Improbably, this score has been translated into audible music 
by some of its readers: "A couple of people," Appel says, "have spontaneously 
started singing a page as they looked at the book, and a music group in London 
actually made a recording from a few pages, using voices not instruments" 
(personal communication, November 30,2017). The point of See Songs} however, is not to hear sounds physically but to listen. 'The difference, as Jean-Luc 
Nancy has pointed out, is that listening is active and creative, as opposed to 
the passive recognition of sounds that have already been aSSigned a meaning. 
"Perhaps we never listen to anything but the non-coded, what is not yet framed 
118 Three for Today 
in a system of signifying references;' he saYSj "and we never hear [entend] anything but the already encoded, which we decode" (36). Nancy's point applies 
to asemic practices} which present something like a system of signifying references only so that we may be forced to go beyond it. And, since we are now 
considering music, his point applies as well to the element of noise music in 
Michael Jacobson's work. Appel's work is less noisy than Jacobson's, but also 
invites us to listen to the "non-coded:' Recall that her work, as she says, is concerned with "the betweens of reading/looking/listening:' 'These are not to be 
separated from each other, but make up a complex hybrid, as indicated by the 
slash marks. Listening is not to be confined to musically notated work like See 
Songs. For Appel, all of these activities partake of the same dynamic: a creative 
and active pursuit of something beyond or "between" the marks on the page. 
This is not something that is already there, but something that materializes 
through an attentive process that we can call, sometimes, listening. In an essay 
referencing Appel, Gerald L. Bruns invites us to "imagine an artwork undergoing, not a process offormation, but one of materialization-which is, one could 
argue, what happens when artworks cease to be intentional (and therefore recognizable) objects" (239). 
Yet, as Appel states in "Chairs and Pigeons," the fact that her markings dissolve, in the reader's mind, into something beyond themselves does not mean 
that the form of those marks is irrelevantj adds is precisely about how differences in marks can produce different effects in one who encounters them. So 
Appel has explored other forms of notation to find out what differences might 
emerge. Morpheme Pages, in which "Chairs and Pigeons" appears, owes something to linguistics, as the book's title indicates. In it, asemic signs are represented separately as in a primerj they may then be refound and recognized 
in the context of a facing page full of such signs. In Appel's Math Minus Math 
actual mathematical signs are used for their visual value rather than their numerical ones, rearranged to form force fields that in their complexity evoke an 
arcane knowledge (Figure 4.6). These are stitched through with tiny verbal 
fragments that in the originals guided the numerical processes, such as "First 
we shall define," "by the dotted line," "therefore:' But as well there are more 
disconcerting axioms, such as "A gesture that's absurd in system A, may be profound in system B, commonplace in system C, an inspiration in system D .. :' 
FIGURE 4.5. Rosaire Appel, page from A Collection of See Songs, 2012. 
120 Three for Today 
These are sentences taken from Appel's journals, displaced to a new context: 
this sentence, in fact, is about displacement and its effects. Another extract 
transferred to this book gives us further insight into Appel's intentions: 
We like things to add up. 
We like to add. 
We think this makes sense 
And it keeps the mind out of 
trouble. (6) 
Actually, to "add up" is not the same thing as to "add." Appel's own adds demonstrates an open-ended exploratory process that cannot really be said to "add up" 
in the sense of arriving at a final summation. So we have the sly dig "We think 
this makes sense" and its accompanying inference, that Appel's purpose here is 
precisely to get the mind into trouble. 
Math Minus Math is very much about the mind and its relation to markings. This is evident in its two epigraphs: 
When you look at this book, everything you see, i.e., everything you 
visually experience, is your construction: the thickness of the spine, 
the white color and rectangular shape of the pages, the black color and 
curved shape of the letters .... 
David D. Hoffman, Visual Intelligence 
I'm proposing that this whole system works by a set of reflexes-that 
thought is a very subtle set of reflexes which is potentially unlimited; 
you can add more and more and you can modify your reflexes. 
David Bohm, Thought as a System 
The first epigraph emphasizes the constructed nature of our experience, the 
habitual patterns by which we perceive; the second opens the possibility that 
these patterns can be modified, by adding. What is added here is a new and 
disconcerting use of the mathematical markings that are usually read as equivalents of concepts, concepts that are more important than the markings by 
which they are conveyed. "Math solutions" says Appel, "are praised for deep 
internal beaut}'J while their purely visual aspect usually slides by unnoticed" 
< 13 > 
FIGURE 4.6. Rosaire Appel, page from Math Minus Math, 2009. 
122 Three for Today 
(personal communication, December 9, 2017). Certainly there is a beauty to 
mathematical markings, which is underscored by the ways that Appel treats 
them. But she also implies that the very notion of number depends on systems 
of marking. So, in striking contrast to the complex composition of most of the 
pages in the book, one of the pages (Figure 4.7) consists only of dots in lines 
and the cryptic statement "It is always there, it is always here, even when you 
are noe' It is tempting to focus immediately on that statement as providing the 
key to this page: we only need to decide what "it" is. But we may get further by 
first looking at the aligned dots in the context of mathematics. They evoke the 
physical basis of counting, the use of objects like pebbles: despite differences 
and irregularities, these lines of dots are equivalent to each other. The very fact 
that the dots are set in lines rather than in a heap makes it possible to count 
them, to add and to subtract. But counting, we should note, is not enumeration. Enumeration means the assignment of a number, that is, a conventional 
sign with an agreed-upon Significance. Here, number is stripped of that significance just as asemic words are; and we are directed to read for a visual rather 
than a numerical value. We are also reminded how much of numerical value, 
of mathematics as a whole, depends on marks read according to conventionj 
and this applies to more than mathematics. Signifying practices of many kinds 
define what we see (as worth noticing), how we see it (as the quotation from 
Hoffman indicates), and how we think about what we see (or perhaps Simply 
how we think). Yet there is always something that extends beyond what can be 
added up or read or understood according to the logiC of any signifying system: 
"It is always there ... " 
Appel's treatments of notation, no matter in what form, do what Flusser 
asked us to do when looking at writing: to strip the marks before us of their habitual significance so that they appear before us as strange-and often strangely 
beautiful. They become abstract-that is to say, nonrepresentational-and this 
is so even when what is meant to be represented is itself an abstraction, as in the 
case of numbers. Abstract comics do something similar: if we accept Walker's 
symbology, ordinary comics have an abstract element, so that here too Appel's 
versions are abstractions of an abstraction. Finally, this sort oflayering is true of 
asemic writing as a whole, no matter to what representational system its techniques may be applied. 
•• • , • • t 
, 
• , • til • • 
• • • • • , ,. 
• • 
• • • • • • 
• • • • • 
• • " • • , , 
It is always there, 
it is always here. 
even when you are not . 
• , • • , , • 
• • • , , , • 
FIGURE 4.7. Rosaire Appel, page from Math Minus Math, 2009. 
124 Three for Today 
Christopher Skinner: Asemic Typography 
'~semic writing did not evolve from handwriting, it emerged from typewriting, 
and more specifically from typing on a keyboard for a computer screen" (n.p.). 
This statement by Jim Leftwich seems at first downright perverse. It contradicts 
one of the main theses of this book so far: that asemic writing is a reaction to 
the dominance of keyboarding, a return to the emotive and artistic qualities 
of freehand writing and an adventurous extension of them. Of course, asemic 
writing's awareness of signs as material markings grew out of a comparable 
awareness displayed by concrete poetry using its favorite tool, the typewriter. 
According to Leftwich, though, in the late 19905 visual poetry moved on to 
another technology: "Many of us were using the computer to make similar 
works. Among other things, we were breaking up the letter into its component parts. From a letteral practice of experimental poetry it was only a very 
small step to move to a letteral and gestural practice of quasi-calligraphic markmaking" (personal communication, November 20,2017). Let's linger on the 
idea of "breaking up the letter into its component parts;' which is perhaps the 
most evident link between asemic writing and typography. 
A good example of that link is the work of Cecil Touchon, a Texan 
artist who moved to Cuernevaca for a number of years. During that time, 
his Fusion Series of collage paintings, a "visual diary" begun long before, was 
given a new impetus by a common practice of Mexican billboard companies: 
if there is no new customer when the rental of a billboard runs out, workers 
shuffle the panels of the existing ad to make its message illegible. This turns 
the billboard into a gigantic collage. Touchon began to cut up lettering from 
Mexican wrestling posters and other advertisements salvaged from the streets. 
Rearranged into abstract compositions, these became the basis for paintings, 
paintings that deliberately reference their material origins: shading is often 
used to produce a trompe l'oeil effect, evoking thin strata of layered paper 
(Plate 6). "I see these works of mine;' Touchon says, "as liberating the forms 
of language from the practical utility of being carriers of some commercially 
driven corporate message, allowing them to exist purely for their own sake as 
shapes, curves, rhythms and colors" ('~tist Statement"). Yet, elegantlyabstract though they are, the forms are still recognizably typographic. As Dan 
Waber has written ofTouchon's work: 
Three for Today 125 
The shapes that emerge are without question letteral, though they are 
operating in a space where it is impossible to read them in a literal way. 
These pieces are looking at the material oflanguage as a thing that can 
be cut apart and re-arranged, and while they cannot be read, the part of 
our vision that is involved in reading is actively engaged in the process 
of viewing them. ("30 by Cecil Touchon") 
If this describes the effect of Touchon's typographically based collage painting, it also describes the effect of asemic writing. It is unsurprising, then, that 
Touchon has become a Significant asemic artist. 
One of his "Asemic Palimpsest Poems" from 2011 (Figure 4.8) provides 
an example. In this work there is still an element of collage: a page is formed 
from the juxtaposition of two half pages, taken from a book of poetry. The seam 
between them takes on unexpected significance as the lettering of the words is 
abruptly cut, leaving shapes that were once stanzas. These shapes are dynamically balanced in relation to each other and to the negative space, a paper space. 
The laid paper, colored beautifully with age, relates to the asemic element as 
both a foil and a furtherance. Touchon has generated asemic writing by overwriting the original printing with dense jags and occasional extensions up or 
down; this gives the look of a script but also, palimpsestically, retains a sense of 
the type underneath. 
The fftype underneath" is retained in a curious piece by John Nyman (Figure 4.9), except that here it is seen only in the mind of the beholder. At first 
glance this page looks like asemic writing; then familiar patterns kick in and we 
see what is actually not there. Nyman has reprinted an extensive selection (142 
pages) of Jacques Lacan's The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psycho-analysis in 
the English translation of 1977; but he has reprinted it in a computer-generated 
font of his own devising, which not only breaks up letters into their component parts but also leaves out about half of those parts. He has christened this 
font Manque. This, he tells us, "references Lacan's famous manque-a-etre, a 
neologism that is derived from the French word for fto miss' or fto lack' but 
is rendered in English as fwant-to-be' by Lacan himself' What we want to be 
here, and not only here, is what is familiar and recognizable. So we are eager to 
fill in what is missing-which is also what we miss, in the same way we miss 
somebody who is gone. This is a dynamic that comes into play when we are 
FIGURE 4.8. Cecil Touchon, A.201'.07. Asemic poetry on antique book page. Copyright 2018 Cecil Touchon. 
Three for Today 127 
faced with even the most distorted asemicwriting, and is part of its allure. Type 
especially, even in its asemic versions, has a reassuring and stable authority to 
it-more so than freehand writing, which is all too subject to the vagaries of 
personality. "Something printed," says Flusser, "is a typical thing, and not a 
distinctive, incomparable, unique thing. In the presence of print, it becomes 
evident that the occupation worthy of human beings is typifying, the manipulation of signs, the 'making of meaning'" (Does Writing Have a Future? 51). So 
when type is broken up in a way that should result in an asemic effect, "the part 
of our vision that is involved in reading" is quick to put it together again. In 
Nyman's piece a selection of the Four Fundamental Concepts tries to pass itself 
off as asemic writing-and it fails not because of its weakness but because of 
its authority. 
These examples give us a sense of the terrain that is being navigated when 
someone based in typographic design begins to expand into asemic writing, 
especially when the two modes are conjoined to occupy the same space on a 
page. This kind of conjunction is a common practice of Christopher Skinner, 
a professional graphic deSigner who among other accomplishments has produced what he calls an "asemic novel" in four parts. The tetralogy is titled Four 
Fools, which is also what its first volume is called. Besides its applicability to the 
volumes of the tetralogy, the title alludes to an old tale from India. In that tale, 
the emperor Akbar asks his minister to find him four fools and bring them to 
court. When the minister shows up with only two, Akbar asks where the other 
two are. The minister politely informs him that one fool is the emperor, who 
made such a request; and the other fool is himself, who dutifully fulfilled it. In 
conversation, though, Skinner enumerates the four fools as follows: "The idea 
of publishing a book that could not be read required an author, a publisher, a 
reader, and possibly an academic" (that would be me). The second volume is 
titled Pabulum, which, says Skinner, "is a word to describe bland intellectual 
matter, and is a satisfying word to say out loud. I liked the idea of this word as 
the title of a book of stimulating visual Signals that is different to every reader:' 
Underovary, the title of the third volume, is a word that Skinner made up. For 
him, it "conjures up a hidden and intimate vitality." The last volume is titled 
An Isochronous Apologue. "An apologue," Skinner explains, "is a type of moral 
fable. The word appears to be little used today, which was appealing in itself, 
1 L .... it -\ \) -\L 1 :>\1-\1 :>\ 
:>L'el"\ e ,,}-;>I 1 ?'""'1 11l'e..ll'l1r ;',J\, I ',J,\\ ?T1,-1 :l\\ ?r·.... H'e 
'}'""'1"'elr ; :>f Ir?1 ,In..l\, re Ir?1 '""'1?Ye' "'e. ?fteT Ire ?\\?Ye'1l1.1r 
1'1:>'%, ?Lle I:> ,\, ... I?I1. ..,; ... elf. ?pp?re'UI; :>11; 11 ? rel?1l:>1 
\\l1r ""1.} Tepr e'e11?1l:l1. \\h..r. ?pp?relll;, ""1.?h:;, :>[ ""1.e :>11; 
.. :>l ........ :>l'le". -\ ,:>rt :>f 11\',Jllle; rcfle ..ll:>1-l'l ""1.} .. :>1' .. 1:>1..'-
1.e", II l' :l11}..,} repr e'ell?ll:>1. Ih>11 re,-:>' er p:>"e"l:>1 :>f. 
1, Ir?1 ?11? frel; h, 1:>1; "' :>ftel e'l:>llrr Ir?1 re \\:>\..11 
r?\ e I:> E':> L?.I t:> '}-e f1..1dl',J1 ',Jf .. :>1',-1:>1..' 1.e". Lu h: 1e\ e r 
111. l'err?p' ne ,r?l1 'ee LetteT "r?1 l' ?I l"l..e, L} ?pprd"e1.;-
l11r \\}-?I l' Irere Ir?1 ""1.:>IJ\?te' Ire e"'eTlre1 .. e :>f Ih: Tepre-
'e1Ie; Te?ll1;. 1.?"'el; Ire prel:>""1.el:> 1. ;',I? l .. e. I}-e Ir?p 
U'el[lr?1 .. :> 1,11I\' Ie' ?\\?Yell1lr. 
1:> ..,?Ye Irl'llr' 1\,l1e .. Ie?r. lei \.., rei 1.. rl I:> Ire 1r e?'""'1 
-\\h .. r h ;>1,:> ""1.?;e \'p elUr e l; :>[ 1:>l'e-Ir?1 1 left ;:>\, 11""1.e 
I:> b:>y 1.. p 11. 1"11 l'lfrtrprdJft:J 1 :JJ Jrc:'.l'"t\. l:>l l\1l1 re""1.e""1.Ler 
Ire 1.. 1.f:>TI1..1?fc [?II-er \\ r:> 1\ ell I:> re,1 11 Ire T',J:>""1. 1.e.!1 I:> Ire 
:>le 11 "h..r h, ;e?1 ..rl11 I? }-le?Hllr Ire ..rll; 11 II-e .. ?Te, 
\\e ?re 1:>11, :>f ?l:>lI-er :>1; "'?1-?11"r:> l' ?\\:>Ye1. L; ':>"'eIh1.lr. 3; \,r?l? 11 I' 1:>1 :>11; II-e re?"I;, Ire ,r:> .. Y, Ire 
Yl:>.%l'llr. ? 1:>I'e '""'1?;e I) re .. ?l1 h.., I:> II-e Te;>l. L\..I Ih, 
e.!pre"e'. 11 1-1, ;re?""1., II-e 11..?,I-';ell11} :>f \,I-?I l' I-?ppe1l1Ir, 
Ire \ e r; re;>"I} ',Jf ? 1. :>, ertl rle1 .. ? 1.;le 'elll1E' lllrI-1 I:> II-e Le; 
11 \\1-1 .. r 1-1, ..rl1i 11e .... 
"'1..,-r ? 1 e.!?""1.p1e r;>r;l; 'ee""1.' I:> .. :>1[1"""1. [re\..i', lI-e'I' 11 
Ire 1r~t'"t1aI1. 1e--t:t-?1 Ire ire?, 1, II-e re?IU?I1:>1 :>f? 'ie'lre. 
"r?1 "e 'ee e""1.er l!111!' I-eTe. ?1""1.:>'1 f::>T Ire flr,1 U"'e.lllre 
1r~t'"t1a1& 1{!,. I' ? fl..1.dl:>1 :>f II-e 1r e?""1. ::>f ?1. ?pp?relI1; 
'e .. :>1.1?r} 1'11;-11 Ih, '-?'e. Ire ire?'" ,?U,fle' :>11; II-e leei 
I::> pT:>l:>llr ,Ieep. "r?l. Ire 1. 1Je' [reI. i ,e? 1 L} pl? .. 11E'. 
?I Ih, p:>111. Ih ... p?rtt. .. \..I?r 'ire?"'. ,ITe"111r Ir?1 11 l' 11 lI'e1f 
fl.ll .. ::> lflT""1.?l1:> 1 :>fh, Ire'I' re2'?r;' 1.1!' ;re?""1.'? 
1f Ire f1..1..11:>1 ',J[ Ire 1 rc?, l' I:> pr',JI:>llr ,Icc .... If Ire ire?"', 
;>fler ?1I. '""'1;> j ,-J'c 'J 1c?r IJ II-c rc;>IUj II-?I ... ?l..'c' II, .. ;> 1. "c 
1:>1 '?; Ir;>1 11 -Ulrrl .. :>rre'",J1.1 I:> Ih, re;>hl} \\l1r:>\..1 e""1.erlrl1lr 
,J";>lLc f:)1' 1L'cllc ;> ? 'c -u'11fe,lcr . .....? 1?1nc. 1;> 1?1nc [T?1.,,;>I\e Ie 
1';[1111 Lie') 1;> '1' r? .. le 1c ':)1 e-,l-bl. It r.:~-t 3t \ ft.u.tr .. 01 l' 'til': t k" uf -
,-cl? -,·I.,l-:>rfc l\,e \::J\" ?je/. flU,? )le\, 1.e 1-'?1'c 1\,'11 '111 ?\;>11. 
~.t\\.:rr1~-t3t\ .It.HI l' il l'k11.:f - ...;>r, 1eJ? 1\';>'11 11 \Ic'1ir;>, \:>\" '1e 
'ere/. l-l\" 1;..' 
FIGURE 4.9. John Nyman, page from The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psycho-analysis: A Selection, 2015. 
Three for Today 129 
but it seemed appropriate for my needs: there are elements within the book 
that suggest that themes are being discussed or debated but without any solid 
narrative. I used the word isochronous to suggest that the book did not belong to 
any particular time" (personal communication, July 5, 2018). 
I have been referring to the tetralogy's four "volumes," a term that is perhaps too ponderously Victorian for these small books, which average around 
forty pages. Yet there are great riches in these little rooms: a wide variety of 
typefaces and asemic scripts, along with continual surprises in the layouts. For 
the fullest appreciation of the books, one should really read them with the 
sections of Skinner's blog Lestaret in which he details the sequence of decisions and adjustments that resulted in the original Four Fools typeface, as well 
as the many that followed.5 Here we learn that, like many other asemic artists, Skinner had been filling notebooks with asemic writing before he knew 
that there was a term for it, let alone anything like a movement. When he decided to design an asemic typeface, he turned to his notebooks for the base 
material (Figure 4.10), and then set to work on his computer, using Adobe 
Illustrator among other tools. The typeface (Figure 4.11) retains and even exaggerates the forward slant of the original writing; and the variations in line 
width give the print a somewhat calligraphic effect. Still, the differences are 
Significant: "Chirographic and typographic developments," says Skinner, "are 
related but separate .... I am interested in the juxtaposition of the two and 
how each can work together and 'playoff" each other" (personal communication, November 28, 2017). This is the guiding principle of the first book he 
created (Figure 4.12). Its pages mix asemic script and type, but there are other 
contrasts as well: dense blocks of writing play against empty space used as a 
design element; bold hand-rendered characters may fill most or all of a page, 
while elsewhere the writing approaches micrographia; and the lines of writing 
may be set hOrizontally or vertically, or attached to another text at an angle. 
This last technique suggests annotatioh or commentary, with the angling 
being derived from Islamic manuscripts that Skinner has in his collection. He 
also has a number of Chinese calligraphic workbooks, which have encouraged 
him to create the oversize characters that he sometimes inserts. Generally, he 
says, 'tlforeign' type has played a huge role in my journey into asemic writing" 
(personal communication, November 28, 2017). 
FIGURE 4.10. Skinner's original asemic script. 
&r/f(P69#~~/P7~~P5 7W;<r\ 
,<S));f(Q 6' (p-D/&-f/oo/g.7/~~ili-aL'f 
fXJ#~/~u&/A!)/~Io#0\Oj'//~ , 
~~hc/f/#.fl/t.9/77LJ;5flh/~%6 
#q/~7/(JoAJ})fid~~~/~-'69" 
#A..9~/~~~(Q-($7&-fbJc/f,.(Q)~~ 
(-P#A..9ASJ)/~7/~~-/77-'6~//~ I . 
(6//,.(Q)/A.9PJhA.f» /~//27r.A.fj)/X) 
'o/67t-9#A-9/g;?//(JoAJ})fi'/~~/'" 
hc/f(Pt-9#A..9/X)/~~/x)~7&-f~ 
ASJ);f(Q6 7 o/&-f/oo6 , ?P7/~~/A!): 
~7~/0-e~/A!)/~1o ~'OJv/~) e. ;Z.!)oI'7~AJ/P7~~~bJc/f(P69#A..9 " . 
(Q-?J~~/t.9-eqtJ;.,!/~~ ~'-o///:P.) e 
#JPJLf&c/f/#.fl/~C//:7LJ;5flb1/~77-'6 
~/27//(JoAJ})fi'/~74~/~-'t..9., , 
FIGURE 4.11. Skinner's script translated to typeface. 
132 Three for Today 
FIGURE4.12. Christopher Skinner, page from FourFools, 2011. 
In the second book of the tetralogy, Skinner retains the concern with the 
differences between calligraphic and typographic asemic, but extends the number 
of asemic typefaces. On the last page, beneath a hand-drawn glyph on a trompe 
l'oeil peeling label, is a list of five "words" in different asemic typefaces (Figure 4.13); all of these have been used earlier in the book, along with others 
(I count at least six more). In his blog, Skinner states that his inspirations for 
such typefaces include "old punched tickets" (the second one down on this 
page), "Arabic structures," and vintage typewriter letters-this last based on 
a 1920 document. Each of these has its own texture-in the sense that it produces an overall visual difference, and so feels different. 
ISlRt 
37 
FIGURE 4.13. Christopher Skinner. page from Pabulum. 2012. 
134 Three for Today 
I am using "texture" here as an artistic tenn. However, it is also used by 
literary critics-promiscuously and impressionistically, and no wonder given 
the vague ways it is defined. Here is one such definition, from the Encyclopaedia 
Britannica Online: 
Texture, the concrete, physical elements of prose or poetry that are 
separate from the structure or argument of the work. Such elements 
include metaphor, imagery, metre, and rhyme. 
In short, texture is everything that makes a work literary as opposed to argumentative or infonnative. But none of these elements are "concrete:' Properly speaking, the only ICconcrete, physical elements of prose or poetry" are the marks on 
the page. These form letters that are woven together in patterns that recur and 
yet are continually varied: the word texture, like the word text, has its root in 
the Latin word texere, meaning to weave. There is no reason, though, why the 
letters that produce the page's material texture need to be those of the familiar 
alphabet. Rosaire Appel's As It Were is subtitled 17 Asemic Stories. Each of the 
stories is written in a different asemic script, and the sense is given that each 
story has its own mood or tone, communicated by its texture. In much the same 
way, literary critics might claim that the tone of a work is the result of "texture," 
though what they are alluding to is not as tangible as the asemic version. 
A desire "to focus on the flow and texture of a script" infonned the first 
stages of Skinner's third volume. Accordingly, Underovary pulls back from the 
wide variety of asemic scripts to concentrate largely on two. The first is a typeface that looks somewhat like lettering that might be found in a medieval illuminated manuscript (Figure 4.14), an association that is reinforced by the layout 
of certain pages. Its deSign-the development of which is scrupulously documented on the Lestaret blog-does indeed have a sense of flow, arising from 
the ligatures between many of the characters, though Skinner later translates its 
curves into an angled geometric version. An even greater flow is found in the second script, which is essentially a wavy line with a few upright marks and small 
circles inserted at intervals. It looks like the most rudimentary way to signal 
writing on a page. The fact that it is a wavy line allows Skinner to alternate, in a 
sort of thoughtful play, between the lines that signal "writing" and the same lines 
used as curving elements of drawings or decorations such as an oval frame. Thus 
-,-
", 
we.Jo~v.@ ~~~ 
FIGURE4.14. Christopher Skinner, study for Underovary. 2013. 
136 Three for Today 
the experimental mind-set that directed the development of the first typeface 
is carried over into the finished book, inviting the viewer to consider the consequences and effects of the book's different versions of writing. 
Between the completion of the third volume of his tetralogy and the start 
of the final one, Skinner collaborated with Tim Gaze in a limited-edition chapbook of Ecritures by Raymond Queneau, founder of the OuLiPo group. This 
was originally a small notebook in which Qpeneau recorded a variety of asemic 
scripts, akin to the "pictograms" that formed part of his Bdtons, chiffres et lettres. 
These influenced the final volume of the Four Fools tetralogy, which consists 
almost entirely of handwritten scripts. However, these exhibit the same scrupulous attention to design detail that characterizes the typographic work. Indeed, 
the distinction-at times opposition-between handwritten and typographic 
asemic becomes difficult to maintain. The apparently handwritten characters in 
Appel's You Have the Right to Remain Silent, for instance (Figure 4.3), turn out 
to have been produced by a computer font that she has designed and has used 
in other work. Leftwich's contention that asemic writing emerged from typewriting, then, does not pertain only to a historical developmentj asemic writing 
continues to emerge from typewriting today through the medium of the computer keyboard. So when Jeremy Balius creates his asemic typewriter (Plate 
7), it seems at first like a joke: a play between mechanical and messy ways of 
producing writing, in which both are being mocked. But type and asemic writing are not so distinct from each other as some might think, and this is not 
merely a matter of what tools are being used. The scrupulous care with which 
Skinner creates his typography (nothing could be further from the "messy") is 
shared by many asemic artists. Xu Bing's painstakingly hand-carved asemics, 
for instance, are all the more disconcerting because they appear within exquisite specimens of traditional book art. Yet the strangeness of these unreadable 
pages cannot be separated from their beauty. In works that no longer deliver a 
message, eloquence has been replaced by elegance. 
READING ASEMIC 
It is wonderful how a handwriting which is illegible can be read, 
oh yes it can. 
Gertrude Stein, The Geographical History of America 
Most asemic works are done on a single piece of paper; and within that circumscribed space they are capable of complex implications about the nature 
of writing. However, Jacobson, Appel, and Skinner have all produced sizable 
books that they call novels, or novellas. With the assignment of a familiar genre 
to an asemic work comes a familiar expectation: that what is before our eyes 
is not only about writing but about reading as well, that these are pages that 
are meant to be read. This is reinforced by the sheer quantity of the pages that 
make up the book. The record for this must be held by Mirtha Dermisache 
with her two-volume, SOO-page book. Second place probably goes to Rosaire 
Appel's As It Were, at 223 pages. As has already been mentioned, each of the 
book's seventeen stories is written in a different asemic script; the longest runs 
to 28 pages. Something more is going on here, then, besides the contrast in 
"textures" that I argued for earlier; for that could be done with single pages, 
or at least with fewer. We are tacitly being encouraged to turn those 28 pages 
one by one, and to linger on the "story" -that is, to read it. But how? How are 
we to read an asemic script, which we have already defined as a writing that is 
illegible, unreadable? Yet any writing, legible or not, carries with it the expectation that it is intended to be read. Some viewers may recognize their own expectations ironically, as a commentary on the human addiction to verbalizing; 
Barthes would probably fall into this category. For others their expectations 
act as a lure, prolonging an initial attention to the point that it becomes a fascinated desire to elucidate a cryptic text. These are opposite attitudes toward 
the same thing: the sense, or hope, that behind an asemic text lies a text of 
137 
138 Reading Asemic 
recognizable words, with a coherent meaning. This basic notion leads to two 
common ways of reading asemic: decoding, where each sign is considered to 
be equivalent to a single letter; and translating, where complete words must be 
given equivalents. 
The most sustained attempts to decode an asemic script have been devoted 
to the Codex Seraphinianus, perpetrated by Luigi Serafini in 1981. Its form is 
recognizably that of an encyclopedia arranged systematically on logical principles, rather than the arbitrary order of the alphabet. After sections on various 
surreal flora and fauna, the Codex illustrates a genus that consists baSically of 
pairs oflegs; these support not bodies but various surprising terminations such 
as umbrellas, balls of yarn, and striped pods that, when ripe, produce tigers. 
There are sections depicting the improbable races, civilizations, and customs of 
countries shown on a map of the world, a world whose continents and islands 
seem to have the ability to rearrange themselves at will; there are sections on 
food, clothing, cryptic rituals, and fantastical architecture. Perhaps the strangest section is the one on language, where the materiality of the letter is taken to 
the extreme. Forming themselves out of various elements, words flame, drip, 
and sprout. No longer confined to the plane of the page, they rise above it with 
the help of gas-filled balloons or are dropped onto it by tiny parachutes. They 
are literally fished from the mouth or dribbled from it onto a white bib. And 
under a microscope, the curves of the letters become those of a highway or a 
stream, populated accordingly, or filled with teeming Dantesque figures (Figure 5.1). 
Along with its bizarre illustrations, the Codex has page after page of asemic 
text, with headings and subheadings, diagrams and graphs, explanatory captions and section headings. The very format of this text holds out the promise 
that the illustrations will be elucidated-a promise that is systematically frustrated, as one illustration in particular indicates. At the beginning of the section 
on language, we are shown a sort of Rosetta stonej but the text that is paired 
with that of the Codex is only another indecipherable script (Plate 8). 
'This has not stopped the fans of Serafini's book from trying to crack the 
code. For many years, elaborate strategies of analysis proliferated on the web, 
along with claims of an imminent breakthrough. Personally, I couldn't see the 
point. In "Cryptotexts," a special section of the online journal SCRIPTjr.nl, I 
was pitted against a worthy antagonist, Kane X. Faucher, who has a deep and 
~ 
~".)e~~ 'v'" 37· ~ ji},' i!;:r ~ 
.;.." ;E'J9~ ~~ 
,,').!' »' t~ (l ~ 
~. 
~'rJ"Ji!~ 
j!,\.~~~o/ 
:.,')3 e~ $i~ 
:)}e. ~ 'v~ V)U 
~, 
~~~~~ 
./'-}i,;"s~Wl)J ..J .v1T'''':-
~) ~./'''':',>':: c1h5 -;:.J ~ 
X(f.:;..,,,; ;JA In;6 ~ d; 
• ~ ~ ..J'~ A ~,,;.;-<~t1~ ~'j..? tiz·; d'l)'.?)J' '(]:.fJ'~)!J ;:'~j<~ i'''';!f).3 ~..;' [jz,..:~i7 .J ,::. ~...: Cl-;;,!,,?? '~,;~<~ "j *; [?,;:.~.1; m>i' ... p1 .,' ~~-.;r~ t '.,...~' ,~~)<" ~f>.?;"",,?d. 
t):"/...:-,I":'; ~:; ;}-j.;~ ;t' ,)'J<' f{;-j'''J;..'? ~:,r.,;,) ;JJ ,t~.'-?~:;;; 5-?~1.Ch.? V ~ ,-,~...D ~ 
~';..;.!:.").l.~~",:J ,;':-,,;:, '£.~>''''Jo3 ~)"7>.~3 (!;,'7 .. ~J :j~ '")~:' .f.:>' ;5,'~j'" ~t') J'l .,; C.~~ .;t .)l7i~-?.2 
FIGURE 5.1. From Luigi Serafini, Codex Serophinionus (New York: Rizzoli. 2013). 
140 Reading Asemic 
rich appreciation of the Codex and its avatars, but at the time was still determined to decode its script. In response I invited Faucher to consider what 
would be gained ifhe were to succeed: 
Considerably less weird than the illustrations and our speculations 
on them, the text would doubtless "explain," in proper encyclopedic 
fashion, what is now already explained by the illustrations-or, far more 
interestingly, what now resists explanation. What we would get from 
a decoded Codex would be nothing more than the pleasure of "getting 
it" -that is, cracking a code. If you are a cryptographer, that pleasure 
will top all others. But, I would suggest, there is also a pleasure in not 
getting it. As long as the Codex is not pinned down-not by Faucher, 
but also not by me-it offers itself as an endless source of speculation 
about its nature vis-a-vis more orthodox encyclopedias, more familiar 
worlds. (Schwenger, "Codex") 
Faucher had always been aware of the possibility that the text of the Codex was 
not a code, and now he is sure of it. What tipped the balance was Serafini himself Tucked into the 2006 reissue of the Codex by Rizzoli was a slim pamphlet 
titled "Decodex." It described the period in 1976 when Serafini obsessively created his book, and specifically the point at which he realized that he needed to 
accompany the illustrations with a text: 
Do you remember how, when we were children, we'd leaf through picture books and, pretending we could read before the children older than 
us, fantasize about the images we saw there? Who knows, I thought to 
myself, perhaps unintelligible and alien writing could make us all free 
to once again experience those hazy childhood sensations. At the time, 
the quest for a new alphabet seemed to me to be the most urgent thing 
that had to be done. Actually, I had to invent one that suited my hand. 
So I began by SCribbling lines that twisted and curved in curlicues and 
arabesques. And from that tangle of ink I slowly distilled a calligraphy 
complete with upper and lower case letters, punctuation and accents. 
It was a script that contained the dream of many other types of script.' 
The ultimate dream, of course, is that this apparently authoritative text is capable of being decoded. 
Reading Asemic 141 
The Codex lures its readers with the promise of an esoteric knowledge; 
and in the world of asemic art it is not the only work that uses such a strategy. 
Another text that lures the reader in this way has recently been unearthed from 
the Gerhard Richter Archives in Dresden. It is Richter's Comic Strip, created 
in 1962 when he was thirty years old, and not published until 2014. The book 
begins with a few legible (though crossed-out) words in German: "Vor fern 
entfernter Zeit lebten Manner, die ... " (In long distant times there lived men, 
who ... ). But after these words the scrawled writing degenerates further, or 
rather metamorphoses into an asemic script that prevails throughout the follOwing pages. From this opening reference to primitive times the book moves 
to an apocalyptic end, cataloging on the way numerous versions of the individual's relation to the collective-the individual in question being an armless figure in a broad-brimmed hat, so abstract that it is rendered with a stamp. Beyond 
this broad outline, the book remains as cryptic as its script. Yet that script fills 
a large portion of the pages; and, like the script of the Codex Seraphinianus, it 
seems to promise an explication of the cartoony images. Captions, diagrams, 
arrows, and seals (created by inking coins) add to the authority of the written 
word. In one extreme case (Figure 5.2), a large ideogram is annotated in detail, 
right down to individual ink splatters.2 
Richter's source for the idea of pseudowriting was undoubtedly Saul 
Steinberg, whose influence on Comic Strip is evident in certain pictorial reminiscences as well as in shared techniques. Both artists at times literally print 
by hand: inking palms or thumbs, which, when applied to the page, can evoke 
douds or textured ground. Both artists have created pseudodocuments validated by official-looking seals. These documents are covered with illegible 
writing-in Steinberg's case, that should be "writings," since he enjoyed evoking various styles of print or individualized signatures without ever lapsing 
into legibility. He once described himself as "a writer who draws" (Bair, xiv), 
which suggests one reason Roland Barthes, another writer who drew, found 
him faScinating. The young Gerd Richter (as he called himself at the time) 
would go on to create art with a very different look-such as paintings based 
on photographs-but he carried forward from this early work a tendency to 
transform familiar media into something strange. 
Another body of work, that produced by Timothy Ely, shares with the 
Codex Seraphinianus the lure of an arcane knowledge and its simultaneous 
FIGURE 5.2. From Gerd Richter. Comic Strip, 1962. Copyright 2018 Gerhard Richter (04042018). 
Reading Asemic 143 
bafflement through an asemic text. Ely calls his writing by a different name, 
though: cribriform, which is "an adjective I've turned into a noun;' he says, "to 
name my drawing that looks like language, meaning perforated like a sieve-a 
perfect descriptor for language" ('~tist's Statement"). His scripts are incorporated into the richly illustrated pages of his Single-copy handmade books, 
which use maps, diagrams, alchemical symbols, and tables to evoke an arcane 
knowledge (Plate 9). These elements lure the viewer in much the same way as 
does the encyclopedic format of the Codex Seraphinianus. Ely's dreamlike layering, though, is dramatically different from the promise of a logical order made 
in Serafini's book, a promise that seems to extend to the apparently systematic 
writing. In Ely's work writing has a quality that is more diffuse, and more suggestive, as he indicates: 
Language doesn't have to be verbal or visual. It can be a sensation, it can 
be in the form of signals. My marks depart from meaning but they're 
not meaningless. They just have a different internal matrix. They don't 
necessarily correspond to a sound or a picture. Sometimes the marks 
are assigned to an emotional color or to a musical note. They are navigational. There is certainly a lot of background noise in these marksthey're crucial to the books. ("Access" n.p.) 
Because the cribriform markings are dissolved into the overall effect of the layered illustrations, they have not provoked the decoding frenzy that Serafini's 
script has. Yet they are "naVigational" for the viewer, and also for the artist during the creative process: "I do feel;' says Ely, "that when I am drawing it, making it, that the marks themselves correspond to the ideas that I am currently 
dazzled with" ('~ccess" n.p.). 
This kind of correspondence has affinities with the linguistic concept of 
the logogram, which we have already encountered in the context of the Chinese 
written character. In asemic circles, though, that word must immediately evoke 
the work of Christian Dotremont. In 1962 he began producing what he called 
Logogrammes, a misleading title, actually. His ink drawings, often on large sheets 
of paper, evoke the signs drawn by his countryman Henri Michaux.3 But unlike 
Michaux's ideograms, Dotremont's drawings are made up of letters-that is, 
phonograms. These letters are highly distorted, to the point that the viewer can 
retrieve very few. Yet each of Dotremont's logograms seems to offer a key to 
144 Reading Asemlc 
translation in the form of a minuscule inscription in ordinary writing. An example is "Chanter jusqu'au cri / Crierjusqu'au chant" (To sing until I cry out / 
To cry out until I sing) (Figure 5.3). What seems to be a title is actually the text 
of the logogram. Large sweeping strokes evoke the Cs of cri and chant. They are 
positioned in accordance with the grammatical reversals of the sentence; and 
the quality of the strokes is consistent with differences in the associative force 
of the words, with chant more delicately drawn than the thicker, blacker lines of 
cri. Two vertical lines with short strokes above them in the middle of the page 
may allude to the repeated j of jusquau; at the top right of the page a similar 
line with a stroke above it evokes the j of cri, shooting straight up out of a large 
lowercase r. It is tempting to say, then, that the artistic work is based on the text 
written beneath-except that Dotremont has explicitly contradicted this: 
Logograms are first-draft manuscripts: the text, not pre-established, is 
drawn with extreme spontaneity, regardless of ordinary proportions and 
regularity ... and thus regardless oflegibility; yet the text is redrawn 
afterwards under the logogram, in very small and readable letters, handwritten, calligraphic. (Lupu-Onet 37) 
The small rather ordinary handwriting hardly counts as "calligraphic" j but for 
Dotremont it is closer to calligraphy than is the work above it: he strongly resisted the suggestion that a logogram was the abstract calligraphy of an already 
established textj quite the reverse. Dotremont, who began as a poet, continued 
to be one, demanding of words that they go beyond their limited expressive 
capacities by means of a graphic eloquence. The words themselves determine 
the inscriptive line} a line that does not merely conform to standard practice 
but reflects the bodily emotions of the writer at the moment. There is no consistency in Dotremont's rendering ofletters (Pelard 3), and thus no possibility 
of a systematic decoding; nor is the text that has been redrawn in small letters 
exactly a "translation" -especially since the emotional force of the poem as expressed by its graphic form is exactly that which resists translation. Dotremont 
takes the power that lies within the 'written word beyond its prescribed forms, 
turning it into a superwriting, a delirium of writing. His logograms underscore 
their defiance of translation by the very gesture-that neat but inadequate 
handwriting-that seems to promise it. 
'''I , ~ 
FIGURE 5.3. Christian Dotremont, Chanter jusqu'au cri / Crier jusqu'au chant, 1972. Copyright Guy 
Dotremont. 
146 Reading Asemlc 
Yet even when we know this, it is difficult not to refer to that handwriting as 
if it were the caption or title of the work. It's the same impulse that makes it almost impossible to resist looking, within the first few seconds, at the title of an 
artwork on a gallery wall; and that apparently makes it necessary for every such 
work to have a title, even if it consists only of the word Untitled. We depend on 
words, a dependence described as an addiction or a viral disease by writers as 
disparate as William S. Burroughs and). Hillis Miller (Schwenger, "Language"). 
To read asemic writing means to resist the pull of words, the voices in the head 
that continually translate into words what we experience. It involves paying 
close attention to the emotional effect of the marks before our eyes. This is not 
easy to do, because the simulacrum of the written page presented to us by an 
asemic work calls out all of our usual reading habits. In reading a conventional 
text we proceed swiftly to concepts, reading past the signs on the page, grabbing whole bundles of words without really seeing them, with our mind either 
anticipating or remembering other moments in the text or in our culture, and 
in any case not focusing on what is literally before our eyes. Rosaire Appel is 
addressing the need to focus when she recommends that readers of Jacob son's 
The Giant's Fence should retrace his asemic characters on a separate piece of 
paper ("Reading & Looking"). 'This exercise will recall something that has been 
lost in an age of print, the role of the writer's hand and indeed the whole body, 
which was for Barthes and Michaux an essential generative force in a writer's 
style. 'The main purpose of the exercise, though, is probably to slow the reader 
down, to break the habitual pace of reading. Once this is done, it can then be 
replaced by another sort of retracing, that of the eye. It will be seen that the 
various asemic characters have their own contours; and that those contours 
have an eloquence of their own. Wassily Kandinsky famously argued that abstract elements of painting such as color, line, and form can be combined as 
are the elements of a language. The potentially infinite combinations of these 
elements communicate psychological shadings-perhaps more so than those 
aroused by explicit depictions: '(The contact between the acute angle of a triangle and a circle;' Kandinsky asserted, "has no less effect than that of God's 
finger touching Adam's in Michelangelo" (759). Because of asemic writing's 
abstract nature, then, the marks on the page may move one along a line that is 
not just material but also psychological, The sequences of characters in asemic 
writing are as varied as any alphabetic sequence; but they do not stand in for 
Reading Asemic 147 
spoken words, nor for the concepts behind words. They conve}'J or at least are 
capable of conveying, subtle movements of the psyche-rather than informa~ 
tion about the external world, or even the external world's idea of an internal 
world. Michaux called these movements gestures, interior gestures. They both 
precede and follow conventional writing. 
Before writing even begins, Flusser reminds us, it is preceded by "nebu~ 
lous shapes" that only later are fitted to words and laid out in lines ("Gesture 
of Writing" 10). So writing always involves reading; for anybody who is writ~ 
ing is also reading those vague shapes in the mind that Plusser speaks of, 
translating them into another medium, continually revising in an attempt to 
achieve a more adequate translation. Writing is not stenography, taking dic~ 
tation from our profound and articulate thoughts, for those thoughts come 
into existence only through the act of writing: "The hand's draWing gesture," 
Tisseron states, "is an essential movement by which thought learns how to 
think itself through" (36). Writing, then, translates into words something that 
is different from words; and as in any act of translation, some things are lost in 
the process, while other things may be gained. What is gained is clarity, logic, 
and "meaning." What is lost is what precedes thought, thought that is com~ 
monly recognized as such only ifit can be verbalized. This pre~thought may be 
related to certain embryonic tendencies of the mind that Nathalie Sarraute, in 
1939, called tropisms. She appropriated this word from the scientific term for 
the slow and subtle movements of plants. Sarraute's tropisms are also subtle, 
but they are not slow: 
These movements, of which we are hardly cognizant, slip through us on 
the frontiers of our consciousness in the form of undefinable, extremely 
rapid sensations. They hide behind our gestures, beneath the words we 
speak, the feelings we manifest, are aware of experiencing, and able to 
define .... While we are performing them, no words express them, not 
even those of the interior monologue. (Tropisms "Foreword") 
Rosaire Appel makes a similar point when she asks, in "Chairs and Pigeons; 
"What of the great unworded? Blips of sensation, fragments of thought, vague 
experiences, unclaimed entities, and also unspecific combinations whose sum 
does not reflect known parts?" (8). Such things, though they are beyond words, 
148 Reading Asemic 
nevertheless underlie words. I have argued elsewhere that associative move· 
ments always accompany our conscious reading of a literary text, of the infor· 
mation that text presents us with; for information alone is never enough to ac· 
count for the emotional effect of a text ("Obbligato"). The distinctive quality 
of a reader's emotional experience emerges from a supplement to the words 
on the page, a supplement that is both brought to the page by the reader and 
called out by the page. Though evoked by words, it is not itself verbal. Rather, 
as Michaux asserts, it is gestural: shapings and tendencies, visual and kinetic. 
Asemic writing conveys something of that elusive nonverbal element; and it 
does so, paradoxically, by foregrounding the materiality of words. Through abstract linear gestures on the page, it evokes interior ones-mental movements 
and shapes, tendencies and qualities. The weaving together of these produces a 
texture, the texture of something that precedes thought and language. Asemic 
writing, so resolutely noncommunicative, can nevertheless communicate this 
mental texture to us, even if it does so in a language beyond words. 
It might be well to test this theoretical idea of what happens during the 
reading of asemic texts against the reports of real readers. In the absence of 
a laboratory, a survey, and a statistical analysis, our best sources (our only 
sources) for such reports are the online comments of readers. Here is one reader's reaction to The Giant's Fence: 
As a literary traditionalist in many ways, I must confess that I had a high 
level of skepticism when opening The Giant's Fence. . .. Once I could let 
down my critical guard, I was allowed to experience the aesthetics of 
what Jacobson describes as "half formed symbol streams:' ... 
. . . The images began to adopt semantic meaning and gain symbolism. I found a primitive language emerging from what the symbols 
began to form for me. Perhaps, this is simply the exercise of the brain 
to find the familiar in the unfamiliar. It was a fascinating new experience. 
(Fouquet) 
Another reader, no less of a traditionalist, found that the experience of reading 
Jacobson's book felt oddly familiar: for her, it recalled 
the mysterious excitement I felt at maybe four or five years old, looking 
at books and starting to understand that those marks under the picture 
RELATED to the pictures, told the story that went with them. 
Reading Asemic 149 
The anticipatory feeling that all those stories and information and 
thoughts were all just WAITING out there to be taken in hand and 
head. Ingested. 
Reading Tlte Giant's Fence evokes a similar childlike excitement. A 
visceral feeling that the story is just beyond grasp, but with focus and 
imagination, a meaning may emerge. Or may not. Either way, you keep 
looking. Ingesting. (Kring) 
Quimby Melton, editor of SCRIPTjr.nl (and thus not a traditionalist), writes: 
"Reading The Giant's Fence is a liberating process of infantilization wherein literate readers allow themselves to get lost once more in a world of uncommunicative signs:'4 Such comments recall Serafini's statement that his asemic script 
related to feelings that accompanied his earliest childhood encounters with 
books; and that it might be capable of restoring those feelings. 
Not everyone will experience Jacobson's text, or any other asemic text, in 
these ways. Not everyone will have the patience to slow down the pace of reading until it matches that of the hand, as Appel recommends; or to allow the implications of the shapes on the page to evoke corresponding emotional gestures 
in the mind. The asemic script will then remain unread, unreadable, at least by 
that particular viewer. What will remain, though, is the artistic power of this 
strange calligraphy. Asemic traces on the surface of a page have their own eloquence; there is no need to probe further than inclination or imagination may 
encourage us to do. Asemic writing is an invitation, not an imposition. 
It is among other things an invitation to play-at a high level, the level of 
art. Jacques Derrida's concept of play might also be applicable. His own style 
of writing, though hardly asemic, resists a stable meaning in favor of play, with 
puns, allusions, and etymologies combining to make the surface of his prose 
shimmer with elusive suggestions. In Positions Derrida declares: 
It is necessary in such a space, and guided by such a question, that writing literally means nothing. Not that it is absurd in the way that absurdity has always been in solidarity with metaphysical meaning. It simply 
tempts itself, tenders itself, attempts to keep itself at the point of the 
exhaustion of meaning. To risk meaning nothing is to start to play. (14) 
That play is in one sense the interminable play of differences, which is brought 
to the fore in asemic writing such as Xu Bing's. But it is also a kind of play that 
150 Reading Asemlc 
is different from the one that Derrida is speaking o~ and that takes place at 
a boundary between exterior signs and interior concepts. When the exterior 
signs are unmoored from their assigned significations, concepts too become 
free to play at the edges of meaning. Barely apprehended, they flicker as sheer 
emotive gestures, psychic movements that were always there, no doubt, beyond what words would normally admit. Readers of asernic texts may experience a recognition, then, a re-cognition, perhaps even a rewiring. They may 
experience this. Or not. For when a new understanding makes its appearance 
through the work of artists, there is always the chance that it will be read as 
Derrida asserts, not mistakenly, that his own work might be read: "under the 
species of the nonspecies, in the formless, mute, infant, and terrifying form of 
monstrosity" ("Structure, Sign" 293). 
I began this book, and will end it, by quoting Jim Leftwich, the artist and 
thinker who, along with countless other asemic practitioners, has given us so 
many unreadable words. Yet, perversely, he maintains that reading is inevitable: it merely changes its way of being-if, that is, we are capable of changing 
with it. 
There is no such thing as asemic writing. 
In fact, there is no such thing as asemic anything. 
Everything is readable, Le., can be and will be given meaning. 
The asemic is an unattainable ideal. 
In striving toward it, many mutations of writing and drawing 
(and other practices: photography, to name but one) 
will come into being. 
This is the value of the asemic. (June 10, 2011) 
ONLINE RESOURCES FOR ASEMIC WRITING 
Asemic Front, https:/ / asemicfront.wordpress.com 
Asemic Movement (Tim Gaze's free journal of asemic writing), 
https://issuu.com/eexxiitt/docs 
"Asemic Writing," Wikipedia, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Asemic _writing 
Asemic Writing for Mail Artists, 
http://iuoma-network.ning.com/ group / asemicwritingformailartists 
Asemic Writing Google+ Group, 
https:/ /plus.google.com/u/O/ communities/ 113710419939034641766 
Differx, http://differx.tumblr.com 
The New Post-Literate: A Gallery of Asemic Writing, 
http://thenewpostliterate.blogspot.com 
Post-Asemic Press, http://postasemicpress.blogspot.it 
The Post-Literate (R)Evolution, http://post-literate.tumblr.com 
Slowforward, https:/ / slowforward.netl tag/ asemic 
THATplanet (Michael Jacobson's online gallery), http://thatplanet.blogspot.com 
Utsanga, https:/ /www.utsanga.it 
Facebook groups: Arte Asemica, Aswrig, Asemic Writing: The New Post-Literate 
151 
131~ 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This is the fourth book of mine that Doug Armato has seen through publication. He is one of the most intellectually curious people I know, and his enthusiasm has buoyed me during the necessarily tedious tasks of getting a book 
together. For all those years, I thank him. This year, I also have Gabriel Levin to 
thank for his help, especially in the involved process of obtaining permiSSions 
for the artwork. Judy Selhorst's copyediting once again gave me the pleasure 
of watching my prose emerge in a cleaner, clearer version. 
In writing this book, I have as always benefited from the generosity of others. Romaric Sulger-Buel sent me a rare copy of the catalog for an exhibition 
of Roland Barthes's paintings in Rio de Janeiro. The ViIem Flusser Archive at 
the Universitat der Kiinste, Berlin, sent me copies of Flusser's unpublished 
English translations "The Gesture of Writing" and "Gesture and Sentimentality." 
Nancy Ann Roth provided an early look at her translation of the first chapter of Flusser's Gesten: Versuch einer Phiinomenologie, now translated in its entirety for the University of Minnesota Press as Gestures. Jeremy Greenway, my 
research assistant for two years, gave me the great benefit of his astuteness, 
curiosity, and diligence. Thanks to Kate Stanley and Royden Kadyschuk for the 
David Foster Wallace quotation; to Susan Holtz for graphic granite; to Alvin 
Comiter for photographing the Codex Seraphinianus; and to Edward T. W. 
Haig of Nagoya University for his responses to the eco-asemics chapter. Paul 
Malone of the German department at the University of Waterloo was a fellow 
traveler in the study of Richter's Comic Strip. Nina Parish, Gerald Bruns, and 
the Cambridge Literary Review helped me obtain pertinent work, and Shelley 
Meisner at the Lunenburg County Community College imported countless 
peculiar books for me, making it possible for me to continue my research while 
living in a cabin in the Nova Scotia woods. Craig Saper and Jed Rasula were 
ideal readers of the manuscript; I thank them for their time and their thoughtful comments. 
153 
154 Acknowledgments 
I have been given the most by the artists, to whom this book is dedicatedall of them, but especially Rosaire Appel, Casilda Garda Archilla, Tim Gaze, 
Marco Giovenale, Michael Jacobson, Christopher Skinner, and Cecil Touchon. 
Finally, and always, my gratitude to Steven Bruhm for all the usual reasons. 
NOTES 
1. What A5emic Writing 15, and Why 
1. Throughout this book, the word illegible will refer, as here, to marks that are unreadable because their configuration does not clearly conform to standard writing practices. 
Words, of course, may be illegible because they are erased, canceled, overprinted, or otherwise obliterated. This is the sense that governs Craig Dworkin's fine study Reading the 
nIegibleJ a book that is not unconnected to this one. Asemic writing, however, is perfectly 
dear in a material sense, even though it is not at all clear semantically. 
2. New York Daily NewsJ June 27, 2013. 
3. Compare Jacques Derrida's assessment of the effects of linearity on writing and thought 
in Of Grammatology (85-87). 
4. For a fuller treatment of the relationship between Schendel and Flusser, see Nancy 
Ann Roth, "Mira Schendel's Gesture." 
5. Eric Downing analyzes the broader implications of Benjamin's interest in graphology 
in his essay "Divining Benjamin." 
2. Three Asemic Ancestors 
1. Par des traits has been translated by Richard Sieburth as Stroke by Stroke; further citations will refer to this translation. The essay's title in French is "Des langues et des ecritures: 
Pourquoi I'envie de s'en detourner." Detourner has connotations beyond a simple turning 
away or rejection: it is commonly translated as "hijack" or "(mis)appropriate." In this sense 
detournement became, in the 1950s, a recognized technique of the Lettrist International, led 
by Guy Debord. It was defined, rather vaguely, as "the integration of present or past artistic 
productions into a superior construction of a milieu" ("Definitions")-which does not do 
justice to the subversive political purposes of its actual practice. The Lettrist International, 
later to become Situationism, was a faction that had broken away from Isidore Isou's original 
Lettrism movement. Lettrism had produced work in a number of artistic fields, including 
what Isou called hyper graphics, a fusion of writing and painting, letters and pictographs, that 
has clear affinities with asemic writing. 
2. "Given Klee's interest in the history of writing, his signs could also be the modern 
eqUivalents of logograms or ideograms. It is left to the viewer to determine whether the 
signs function as letters, words, objects, or ideasP (Aichele 176). 
3. This reading perhaps underemphasizes the narrative implications of Michaux's title. 
For two asemic novels with a strong suggestion of narrative, see Michael Jacobson's Action 
155 
156 Notes to Chapter 2 
Figures and, to a lesser degree, his The Giant's Fence. Also worth considering, although not exactly asemic, is Oskar Fischinger's abstraction of the narrative progression of Shakespeare's 
Twelfth Night and Fritz von Unruh's Bin Geschlecht. "These scroll-like charts do not try to 
show just the literal movements and gestures of the actors, but rather by abstract designs try 
to convey the changing moods, the flow of emotion, the intensity, style, and flourish of the 
ideas and the experiences created by the process of the action" (Moritz 41). 
4. For a study of the various theories of physical empathy in dance spectators, see Susan 
Leigh Foster's "Movement's Contagion:' 
S. Nina Parish concludes her authoritative book on Michaux with a section titled "Par_ 
allels with Dance Notation." It may be Significant that several online asemic sites include 
pages from Chor/graphie, a book first published in 1700 that details a dance notation system 
invented by Raoul-Auger Feuillet. 
6. Neil Badmington has explored this aspect of Barthes in a fascinating essay titled "The 
'Inkredible' Roland Barthes;' to which I am indebted for many of the points made here 
about Barthes's material practice. 
7. Descartes touches upon the relation between head and hand during the writing process in the course of an argument about the way movements are transmitted from the body 
to the objects with which it is engaged. His example is what happens when one writes with a 
quill pen: "While I am writing, at the very moment when individual letters are traced on the 
paper, not only does the point of the pen move, but the slightest motion of this part cannot 
but be transmitted simultaneously to the whole pen. All these various motions are traced 
out in the air by the tip of the quill, even though I do not conceive of anything real passing 
from one end to the other" (41). Writing, then, is produced by motions that to some degree 
are invisible to the writer-who is inscribing another text at some remove from the concrete 
one, the mirage of a text. 
8. "Technique is very largely a matter of physique," asserted Edith Sitwell (v). 
9. The asemic artist Marco Giovenale counts among his influences "Emilio Villa, who 
was the author of a number of 'sibyls,' visual poems-not asemic ones-handwritten 
mostly in Latin or French. Hence my 'asemic Sibyls; which are indecipherable" ("Maintenant 
#65"). Sibille asemantiche, or Asemic Sibyls, is the title of a collection of related asemic works 
by Giovenale. 
10. Here a footnote from Twombly's sculptural work may be appropriate. His Untitled 
(Funerary box for a lime green python) (New York, 1954) is an all-white piece consisting of 
two palm-leaf fans set upright on a box. There is a double perversity in the (non)title being 
immediately followed by a highly evocative title, one that emphasizes a color that is nowhere 
to be seen. But it is immanent in Twombly's white, which implies the full spectrum ofimaginative potential. 
11. Henri Michaux became just such a man when, as the result of a fall in 1957, his right 
hand became temporarily unusable. "Only my left self got up again" from that fall, he writes 
(Darkness Moves 244). A fortunate fall indeed, for it led to his discovery of what he calls 
1'1IOmme gauche; he subsequently referred to his work as "left-handed exercises." 
Notes to Chapter 3 157 
12. "When I work, I work very fast; says Twombly, "but preparing to work can be any 
length of time. It can even be a year" (Serota 50). 
13. See Leeman's Cy Twombly (I85) and Jacobus's Reading Cy Twombly (97-98). In an 
untitled 1968 collage, Twombly includes a reproduction of Leonardo's Deluge Descending a 
Valley. 
3. Traces 
1. Archilla's drawing was inspired not by nature but by art. It is one of a series titled Una 
conversacion con Ana Hatherly. The Portuguese poet and artist Ana Hatherly (1929-2015) 
was fascinated by writing and explored its traits through strategically deformed drawings. 
She published these drawings under such titles as 0 escritor and L'Invention de l'icriture. 
Archilla's homage to her predecessor underscores the continuity of the asemic tradition. 
2. The legible, if problematic, beach writing postulated by Knapp and Michaels may be 
contrasted to the sculpted asemic writing inscribed on the sand of South African beaches 
by Andrew van der Merwe. This Cape Town calligrapher brings asemic signs outdoors, and 
adds to their illegibility an element of transience. 
3. "Writing cannot exist without carrying a meaning," Barthes says; "either it directly 
refers to a message, or it refers indirectly to a psychological disposition" (All Except You 22; 
my translation). The latter option significantly opens up the meaning of "meaning:' 
4. Gimeno is fascinated by the Man Ray Poem that I have included here as an ultimate 
version of the linear nature of writing. In 2015 he created a sculpture, Carta a Man Ra~ consisting of six steel rods with thinner rods emerging from them-left justified, right ragged, 
and evenly spaced-that give a strong impression of text in columns. He then created a 
companion piece, Carta a Man Ray 2, in which the horizontal steel rods are replaced by 
sticks and other materials garnered from the beach. 
5. For a fuller study, see Bottero, "CangJie and the Invention of Writing." 
6. The New Directions edition of Ideograms in China, translated into English by Gustaf 
Sobin, is unpaginated. However, the book is short enough that the reader will have no difficulty in finding the passages referred to here. 
7. "Accounts of Michaux's attempt to acquire the rudiments of Chinese calligraphy stress 
that he was a singularly unsuccessful student" (Noland 159). 
8. The notion that Chinese would be the best model for a universal language has had 
a surprisingly long life. In 1966 the eminent Sorbonne comparatist Rene Etiemble, citing 
Descartes and Leibniz, considered the virtues of Chinese as an "international working language" for comparative studies, before regretfully admitting that it had little chance of being 
accepted (29). 
9. For a discussion of how the Logogrammes relate to translation, see chapter 5. 
10. This translation is by Guido Vermeulen, who was himself an asemic artist. All of the 
follOwing quotations from Dotremont's essay are from this version, with my own occasional 
modifications. The translated essay, along with the French original, can be found on the 
GAMMM website, at http://gammm.org/index.php/2007 /07 /30. 
158 Notes to Chapter 3 
11. In a note Michaux corrects himself: "Rather than calligraphy, the art of writing." For 
in many countries calligraphy has become the antithesis of the spontaneity that is, for the 
Chinese, the mark of a true artist of writing: "With the exception of Arabic, calligraphy in 
other languages (when it exists) is no more than the expression of either some psychological order or, during great periods, of some ideal and often religious comportment. There is 
in all that a rigidity, a stiffness, a uniform stiffness that produces lines, not words, the standard corset of nobility, liturgy, of puritanical severity." 
12. See Xu Bing's detailed account, in "The Making of Bookfrom the Sky" (52-53), of the 
factors that determined his choice of the typeface design. 
4. Three for Today 
1. Asemic Writing: Offline and in the Gallery, Minnesota Center for Book Arts, March 10-
May 28, 2017. 
2. Unless otherwise noted, all page numbers for Jacobson in this chapter refer to his 
Works & Interviews, 1999-2014. 
3. A famous case where "alien writing" literally meant writing channeled from extraterrestrial beings is that of Helene Smith, a French medium who in the late nineteenth 
century claimed to be transmitting messages in Martian. Despite some remarkable resemblances to asemic scripts (e.g., certain systems devised by Christopher Skinner), these 
do not, strictly speaking, qualify as asemic because Smith was able to translate them into 
French. The psychologist Theodore Flournoy published a lengthy study of her case, titled 
From India to the Planet Mars. Examples of her Martian script can be found in the anthology Imagining Language, edited by Jed Rasula and Steve McCaffery-an extraordinarily 
rich collection that includes much material pertinent to asemic writing. 
4. In his essay '~bstract Form," Andrei Molotiu discusses compositional elements in the 
comic-strip art of Steve Ditko. Mark Newgarden and Paul Karasik, in an essay titled "How 
to Read Nancy," have systematically stripped down a three-panel gag by Ernie Bushmiller to 
show how its composition contributes to the comic's effectiveness. I cite their work in '~bstract Comics and the Decomposition of Horror" before going on to analyze the emotional 
impact of nonrepresentational sequences in three abstract comics. 
S. For these sections, see the blog at https://lestaret.wordpress.com/2010/07 / 19/an 
-asemic-font. 
s. Reading Asemic 
1. This text is taken from the "Decodex," translated by Sylvia Notini, which is included 
in the 2013 edition of the Codex. In May 2009 Serafini spoke to the Oxford Bibliophiles and 
made the same point From notes taken by Enrico Prodi, who was present at the time: "The 
book creates a feeling of illiteracy which, in turn, encourages imagination, like children seeing a book: they cannot yet read it, but they realise that it must make sense (and that it does 
in fact make sense to grown-ups) and imagine what its meaning must be" (9). See also the 
2015 interview with Serafini by Katerina Babkina. Jeffrey Stanley's 2010 thesis in computer 
Notes to Chapter 5 159 
science, the source of the Prodi quotation, indicates that even after the project of decoding 
the Codex was exploded by the author himsel£ his book remained a challenging test case in 
other ways. Stanley used the Codex to demonstrate "that it is possible to study a language 
using a computer visually, without resorting to a transcription scheme" (72), in which characters are translated into numbers. 
2. Interestingly, Christopher Skinner, on page 17 of Pabulum} uses the same device of annotating, with labels in asemic type, the component parts of a large ideogram-right down 
to a small ink fleck that has the look of an accident. Skinner's book appeared two years before the publication of Comic Strip. 
3. Dotremont is often linked with lvlichaux, also a poet as well as an artist; more often 
the comparison stresses the differences beneath their apparent similarities. See Emmanuelle 
Pelard, "La Nomadisme du signe"; and Nina Parish, "Between Text and Image:' Parish relates an anecdote about the first time rv1ichaux was taken to an exhibition of Dotremont's 
work. Without looking closely, he denounced it as a shameless imitation of his own experiments with signs-until it was pointed out to him that the images arose out of actual words, 
which reassured him. 
4. The preceding comments are all excerpted from online customer reviews of The Giants 
Fence on Amazon.com. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Aichele, Kathryn Porter. Paul Klee, Poet/Painter. Rochester, N.Y.: Camden House, 2006. 
Ames, Roger T. "Reading Xu Bing's A Book from the Sky: A Case Study in the Making 
of Meaning." In Xu Bing and Contemporary Chinese Art: Cultural and Philosophical 
Reflections, edited by Hsingyuan Tsao and Roger T. Ames, 33-65. Albany: State 
University of New York Press, 2011. 
Appel, Rosaire. adds. New York: Press Rappel, 2016. 
--. As It Were: 17 Asemic Stories. New York: Press Rappel, 2010. 
--. "Chairs and Pigeons." In Morpheme Pages. New York: Press Rappel, 200S. 
--. A Collection of See Songs. New York: Press Rappel, 2012. 
--. "Interview." Abstract Comics, November 4,2009. http://abstractcomics.blogspot 
.com. 
--. Math Minus Math. New York: Press Rappel, 2009. 
--. "Reading & Looking." Customer review of TIle Giant's Fence, by MichaelJacobson, 
January 8, 2009. Amazon.com. https:/ /www.amazon.com. 
--. Sample Book. 2017. http://gammm.org/wp-content/uploads/20 17/051 APPEL 
_ SampleBook.pd£ 
--. Un translated: A Catalog. New York: Press Rappel, 2013. 
--. You Have the Right to Remain Silent: An Unclaimed Nightmare. New York: Deadly 
Chaps, 2012. 
Babkina, Katerina. "Luigi Serafini on How and Why He Created an Encyclopedia of an 
Imaginary World." Bird in Flight,June 1,2015. https:/ Ibirdinflight.com/media/luigi 
-serafini-on-how-and-why-he-created-an-encyclopedia-of-an-imaginary-world.html. 
Badmington, Neil. "The 'Inkredible' Roland Barthes:' Paragraph 31, no. 1 (2008): 84-94. 
Bair, Deirdre. Saul Steinberg: A Biography. Toronto: Random House, 2012. 
Barry, Lynda. Picture This: The Near-Sighted Monkey Book. Montreal: Drawn and Quarterly, 
2010. 
Barthes, Roland. "An Almost Obsessive Relation to Writing Instruments." In The Grain 
of the Voice: Interviews 1962-1980, translated by Linda Coverdale, 177 -S2. Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1991. 
--, "Cy Twombly: Works on Paper:' In The Responsibility of Forms, translated by 
Richard Howard, 157-76. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1991. 
--. Empire of Signs. Translated by Richard Howard. New York: Hill and Wang, 1982. 
--, "Lectures de l'enfance." In Oeuvres completes, edited by Eric Marty, 3: 1247-51. 
Paris: Seuil, 1993. 
161 
162 Bibliography 
--. Letter to Mirtha Dermisache, March 28, 1971. In Mirtha Dermisache: Escrituras} 
dibujos, ediciones ... lecturas. Herlitzka + Faria, 2013. http://www.henriquefaria-ba.com 
I enl exhibiciones/ mirtha-dermisache-escrituras-dibujos-ediciones-lecturasl acerca_ de. 
--. A Lovers Discourse: Fragments. Translated by Richard Howard. New York: Hill and 
Wang, 1978. 
--. "Masson's Semiography." In The Responsibility of Forms} translated by Richard 
Howard, 153-56. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1991. 
--. MytholOgies. Translated by Annette Lavers. New York: Hill and Wang, 1972. 
--. The Neutral: Lecture Course at the College de France (1977-1978). Translated by 
Rosalind E. Krauss and Denis Hollier. New York: Columbia University Press, 2005. 
--. "Note sur un album de photographies de Lucien Clergue" (1981). In Oeuvres 
completes} edited by Eric Marty, 3:1203-5. Paris: Seuil, 1993. 
--. The Preparation of the Novel: Lecture Courses and Seminars at the College de 
France 1978-1979 and 1979-1980. Translated by Kate Briggs. New York: Columbia 
University Press, 2011. 
--. "Requichot and His Body:' In TIle Responsibility of Forms, translated by Richard 
Howard, 207-36. Berkeley: University of California Press} 1991. 
___ . Roland Barthes by Roland Barthes. Translated by Richard Howard. New York: 
Hill and Wang, 2010. 
--. The Rustle of Language. Translated by Richard Howard. New York: Hill and Wang, 
1986. 
--. "Variations sur l'ecriture." In Oeuvres completes, edited by Eric Marty, 2:1535-74. 
Paris: Seuil, 1993. 
--. "The Wisdom of Art:' In The Responsibility of Forms, translated by Richard 
Howard, 177-94. Berkeley: University of California Press} 1991. 
Barthes, Roland, and Saul Steinberg. All Except You. Paris: Galerie Maeght, 1983. 
Beaver, Harold. "Homosexual Signs (In Memory of Roland Barthes)." Critical Inquiry 8, 
no. 1 (Autumn 1981),99-119. 
Benjamin, Walter. "Review of the Mendelssohns' Der Mensch in der Handschrift." In Selected 
Writings, vol. 2, pt. 1, edited by Michael W.Jennings, Howard Eiland, and Gary Smith, 
131-34. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1999. 
Berger, John. "Post-scriptum." In Audible Silence: Cy Twombly at Daros, edited by Eva Keller 
and Regula Malin, 45. Zurich: Scalo, 2002. 
Bijlenga, Marian. Written Weed. Staphorst, Netherlands: Hein Elfe~ 2004. 
Blanchot, Maurice. "The Absence of the Book," translated by Lydia Davis. In The Station Hill 
Blanchot Reader, edited by George Quasha, 471-86. Barrytown, NY.: Station Hill, 1999. 
Bottero, Fran~oise. "CangJie and the Invention of Writing: Reflections on the Elaboration 
of a Legend." In Studies in Chinese Language and Culture: Festschrift in Honor of Christoph 
Harbsmeier, edited by Christoph Anderl and Halvor B0yesen Eifring, 135-55. Oslo: 
Hermes Academic Publishing, 2006. 
Breens, Tom. "Cursive Writing: A Fading Skill." Discovery News, September 21,2009. 
http://news.discovery.com/human/ cursive-writing-penmanship.html. 
Bibliography 163 
Bruns, Gerald L. "Obscurum per Obscurius." Cambridge Literar)' Review 1, no. 2 (2010): 
229-40. 
Bucarel1i, Palma. "Galleria del Cavallino, Venice" (1958). In Writings on C)' Twombl)1J edited 
by Nicola Del Roscio, 44. Munich: Schirmer/Mosel, 2002. 
Bush, Christopher. Ideograpl1ic Modernism: Cl1ina, Writing, Media. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2010. 
Cage,John. Notations. New York: Something Else Press, 1969. 
Caillois, Roger. "'The Ultimate Bibliophilia." In Literar), Debate: Texts and Contexts, edited 
by Denis Hollier and Jeffrey Mehlman, translated by Arthur Goldhammer et al., 60-65. 
New York: New Press, 2001. 
Cal vet, Louis-Jean. Roland Barthes: A Biograpl1y. Translated by Sarah Wykes. Cambridge: 
Polity Press, 1994. 
Carpentier, Alejo. TI,e Lost Steps. Translated by Harriet de Onis. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 
1967. 
Cateforis, David. "An Interview with Wenda Gu." In Wenda Gu: Art from Middle Kingdom 
to Biological Millennium, edited by Mark H. C. Bessire, 143-61. Cambridge: MIT Press, 
2003. 
Cayley, John. "His Books." In Tianshu: Passages in tile Making of a Book, edited by Katherine 
Spears, 1-37. London: Bernard Quaritch, 2009. 
Chang, Han-liang. "Hallucinating the Other: Derridean Fantasies of Chinese Script." Working paper, Center for Twentieth-Century Studies, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, 
Fall 1988. 
Cowell, Henry. "The Joys of Noise" (1929 ).In Audio ClIlture: Readings in Modern Music, 
edited by Christoph Cox and Daniel Warner, 22-24. New York: Continuum, 2004. 
Dachy, Marc, ed. "Graphies." Special issue, Luna-Park, no. 2 (1976). 
Danto, Arthur C. "Scenes from an Ideal Friendship." Artforum International 50, no. 3 
(November 2011): 212-15. 
"Definitions." Internationale Situationniste, no. 1 (June 1958). Translated by Ken Knabb. 
Situationist International Online. Accessed May 10,2019. http://www.cddc.vtedu 
/ sionline/ si/ definitions.html. 
DeFrands,John. n,e Chinese Language: Fact and Fantasy. Honolulu: University ofHawai<i 
Press, 1984. 
--. Visible Speech: The Diverse Oneness of Writing Systems. Honolulu: University of 
Hawai'i Press, 1989. 
De Looze, Laurence. n,e Letter and the Cosmos: How the Alphabet Has Shaped the Western 
View of the World. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2016. 
Dermisache, Mirtha. "Artist's Statement." September 2011. Gallery P420, Bologna. http:// 
www.p420.it/en/ artisti/ dermisache-mirtha. 
Derrida,Jacques. Dissemination. Translated by BarbaraJohnson. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1981. 
--. Memoirs of the Blind: The Self-Portrait and Otl1er Ruins. Translated by Pascale-Anne 
Brault and Michael Naas. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993. 
164 Bibliography 
--. OJ Grammatology. Translated by Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak. Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 1997. 
--. Positio'lS. Translated by Alan Bass. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981. 
--. "Structure, Sign} and Play in the Discourse of the Human Sciences:' In Writing 
and Difference, translated by Alan Bass} 278-93. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1978. 
Descartes, Rene. The Philosophical Writings of Descartes, vol. 1. Translated by John 
Cottingham, Robert Stoothoff, and Dugald Murdoch. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1985. 
Dorfles, Gillo. "Written Images of Cy Twombly." Metro 6 (1962): 65-71. 
Dotremont, Christian. GratJd HOtel des valises. Edited by Jean-Clarence Lambert. Paris: 
Galilee, 1981. 
--. "Signification et Sinification" (1950). Posted on GAMMM,July 30,2007. http:/ / 
gammm.org/index.php/2007 /07 /30. 
Downing, Eric. "Divining Benjamin: Reading Fate, Graphology, Gambling:' MLN 126 
(2011): 561-80. 
Durgin, Patrick. "Witness Mirtha Dermisache: Being Recognized by a Stranger." Jacket2, 
September 8,2014. http://jacket2.org. 
Dworkin, Craig. Reading the Illegible. Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press} 2003. 
Dyson, Anne Haas. "The Emergence of Visible Language: Interrelationships between 
Drawing and Early Writing." Visible Language 16, no. 4 (1982): 360-81. 
Ely, Timothy C. 'i\.ccess to a Book That Won't Open." Interview by Steve Clay. In The Flight 
into Egypt: Binding the Book. San Francisco: Chronicle Books, 1995. 
--. 'i\.rtist's Statement for Black Maps (1997)." Granary Books. https:/ /www 
.granarybooks.com/book/ 1149. 
Erickson, Britta. Words without Meaning, Meaning without Words: 111e Art of Xu Bing. 
Seattle: University of Washington Press, 2001. 
Ernst, Max. Maximiliana or the nIegal Practice of Astronomy: Hommage a Dorothea Tanning. 
Edited by Peter Schamoni. New York: New York Graphic Art Society, 1974. First 
published 1964. 
Etiemble, Rene. The Crisis in Comparative Literature. Translated by Herbert Weisinger and 
Georges Joyeax. East Lansing: Michigan State University Press, 1966. 
Evens, Aden. Sound Ideas: Music, Mac/Jines, and Experience. Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press/2005. 
Fenollosa} Ernest, and Ezra Pound. 11Je Chinese Written Character as a Medium for Poetry: 
A Critical Edition. Edited by Haun Saussy,Jonathan Stalling} and Lucas Klein. New 
York: Fordham University Press, 2008. 
Fioretos, Aris. The Gray Book. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1999. 
Fischer, Steven Roger. Rongorongo, the Easter Island Script: History, Traditions, Texts. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997. 
Flournoy, Theodore. From India to the Planet Mars: A Case of Multiple Personality with 
Bibliography 165 
Imaginary Languages. Translated by Daniel B. Vermilye. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton 
University Press, 1994. First published 1899. 
Flusser, Vilem. Does Writing Have a Future? Translated by Nancy Ann Roth. Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press, 2011. 
--. "Gesture and Sentimentality." Translation by the author of"Geste und 
Gestimmtheit," chap. 1 of Gesten: Versuch einer Phiinomenologie. Bensheim: Bollman, 
1993. Typescript, 9 pp. 
--. "The Gesture of Writing." Translation by the author of "Die Geste des Schreibens," 
chap. 3 of Gesten: Versuch einer Phiinomenologie. Bensheim: Bollman, 1993. Typescript, 
18 pp. 
--. Into the Universe oj Technical Images. Translated by Nancy Ann Roth. Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press, 2011. 
--. "Line and Surface:' In Writings, edited by Andreas Strohl, translated by Erik Eisel. 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2002. 
--. "Mira Schendel:' In "Mira Schendel's Gesture: On Art in Vilem Plusser's Thought, 
with 'Mira Schendel' by Flusser," by Nancy Ann Roth. Tate Papers, no. 21 (Spring 
2014). http://www.tate.org.uk/ research/publications. 
Forrest, Seth]. "'The Apotheosis of Noise': Asemic Writing, Sound Poetry and Noise 
Poetics." Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Modern Language Association, 
Philadelphia, January 2017. 
Foster, Susan Leigh. "Movement's Contagion: The Kinesthetic Impact of Performance:' 
In The Cambridge Companion to Performance Studies, edited by Tracy C. Davis, 46-59. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008. 
Foucault, Michel. The Order oj Things: An Archaeology of the Human Sciences. New York: 
Vintage Books, 1973. 
Fouquet, Kristin. "A Fascinating New Experience." Customer review of The Giant's Fence, 
by Michael Jacobson, January 18,2009. Amazon.com. https:/ /www.amazon.com. 
Freud, Sigmund. Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis, pt. II. In The Standard Edition oj 
the Complete Psychological Works ojSigmund Freud, vol. IS, translated by James Strachey. 
London: Vintage Books, 2001. 
Frith, Uta. "Beneath the Surface of Developmental Dyslexia." In SJlrjace Dyslexia: 
Neuropsychological and Cognitive Studies oj Phonological Reading, edited by K. E. 
Patterson,]. C. Marshall, and M. Coltheart, 301-30. London: Lawrence Erlbaum, 
1985. 
Fuller, Matthew, and Andrew Goffey. "Toward an Evil Media Studies:' In The Spam Book: 
On Viruses, Porn, and Other Anomalies from the Dark Side of Digital Culture, edited 
byJussi Parikkaand TonyD. Sampson, 141-59. New York: Hampton Press, 2009. 
Gaze, Tim. Asemic Movement 1. January 2008. https:/ / issuu.com/ eexxiitt. 
--. "Four Qyestions about Asemic Writing, #04: Tim Gaze:' SCRIPTjr.nl, July 12, 
2015. http://scriptjr.nl. 
Giovenale, Marco. "Main tenant #65: Marco Giovenale." Interview by SJ Fowler. 
166 Bibliography 
3:AM Magazine, June 14,2011. https:/ Iwww.3ammagazine.com/3am/maintenant-65 
-marco-giovenale. 
--. Sibille asemantiche. Rome: La Camera Verde, 2008. 
Gu, Wenda. "Words in Art: Wenda Gu on Rewriting and Retranslating Traditional 
Chinese Culture." Interview. Art Radar, June 15,2011. http://artradarjournal.com. 
Hannan, Graham. Guerilla Metaph)lsics: Phenomenology and the Carpentry of Things. Chicago: 
Open Court, 2005. 
Hatherly, Ana. 0 escritor. Lisbon: Moraes, 1975. 
--. L'Invention de l'ecriture. Paris: Pagine di\rte, 2013. 
Hegarty, Paul. "Residue-Margin-Other: Noise as Ethic of Excess." 2003. http:/ / 
dotdotdotmusic.com/hegarty I.html. 
Ingold, Tim. Lines: A Brief History. New York: Routledge, 2007. 
Jacobson, Michael. Action Figures. Morrisville, N.C.: Lulu Press, 2011. 
--. TIle Giant's Fence. Charleston, S.c.: Barbarian Interior, 2005. 
--. "On Asemic Writing:' Asymptote, July 2013. https://www.asymptotejournal.com. 
--. "Without Words: Talking with Tim Gaze." Commonline Journal, no. 8 (Winter 
2008-9). http://www.commonlinejoumal.com. 
--. Works & Interviews, 1999-2014. Charleston, S.c.: Barbarian Interior, 2015. 
Jacobson, Michael, and Tim Gaze, eds. An Anthology of Asemic Handwriting. The Hague: 
Uitgeverij, 2013. 
Jacobus, Mary. Reading Cy Twombly: Poetr), in Paint. Princeton, NJ.: Princeton University 
Press, 2016. 
Joyce, James. Finnegans Wake. New York: Penguin, 1999. First published 1939. 
Judd, Donald. "Cy Twombly." Arts Magazille 58, nos. 8-9 (May-June 1964): 38. 
Kaikkonen, Satu, and Quimby Melton. "Satu Kaikkonen:' SCRIPTjr.nl, December 8, 2012. 
http://scriptjr.nl/ texts/ asemic/ satu-kaikkonen. 
Kandinsky, Wassily. Kandinsky: Complete Writings on Art, vol. 2. Edited by Kenneth C. 
Lindsay and Peter Vergo. Boston: G. K. Hall, 1982. 
KIee, Paul. Notebooks} vol. 1, The Thinking Eye. Edited by Jurg Spiller. London: Lund 
Humphries, 1961. 
Knapp, Steven, and Walter Benn Michaels. "Against Theory." Critical Inquiry 8, no. 4 
(Summer 1982): 723-42. 
Konnikova, Maria. "\\'hat's Lost as Handwriting Fades:' New York Times,June 2, 2014. 
Kring, B. "Paper Has More Presence Than Electronic Media." Customer review of The 
Giants Fence} by MichaelJacobson,January 16,2009. Amazon.com. https:/ /www 
.amazon.com. 
Latour, Bruno. Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-Network-l1leory. New 
York: Oxford University Press, 2005. 
Leeman, Richard. Cy Twombly: A Monograph. London: Thames and Hudson/Flammarion, 
2005. 
Leftwich,Jim, ed.Asemic Writing: Definitions and Contexts, 1998-2016. Roanoke, Va.: 
TLPress,2016. 
Bibliography 167 
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm von. New Essays on Human Understanding. Edited by Peter 
Remnant and Jonathan Bennett. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981. 
Leonardo da Vinci. Leonardo on Painting: An Anthology of Writings by Leonardo da Vinci. 
Edited by Martin Kemp. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 2001. 
Leroi-Gourhan, Andre. Gesture and Speech. Translated by Anna Bostock Berger. Cambridge: 
MIT Press, 1993. 
Leung, Simon, and Janet A. Kaplan. ''A Conversation with Wenda Gu, Xu Bing, and 
Jonathan Hay:' Art Journal 58, no. 3 (Autumn 1999): 86-99. 
Liu, Lydia H. "The Non-book, or the Play of the Sign." In Tianshu: Passages in the Making of 
a Book, edited by Katherine Spears, 65-79. London: Bernard Quaritch, 2009. 
Lupu-Onet, Raluca. "Christian Dotremont's Logograms: An Intermedial Work avant la 
Lettre." In Intermedial Arts: Disrupting, Remembering and Transforming Media, edited 
by Leena Eilirta with Liliane Louvel and Sabine Kim, 33-50. Newcastle upon Tyne, 
England: Cambridge Scholars,20l2. 
Mallarme, Stephane. "Ballets," translated by Evlyn Gould. Performing Arts Journal 15, no. 1 
(January 1993): 106-10. 
--. Selected Letters of Stephane Mallarme.. Edited by Rosemary Lloyd. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1988. 
McLuhan, Marshall, and Quentin Fiore. The Medium Is the Massage: An Inventory of Effects. 
Berkeley: Gingko Press, 2001. First published 1967. 
Medsker,Josh. "Talking about Asemic Writing (with Michael Jacobson):' Twenty-Four Hours 
Online, January l3, 2015, http://twentyfourhoursonline.org/2015/01/l3/talking 
-about-asemic-writing-with-michael-jacobson. 
Melton, Ql1imby. "Fascinating Addition to the Cryptotext Tradition." Customer review 
of The Giant's Fence, by MichaelJacobson, May 8, 2010. Amazon.com. https://www 
.amazon.com. 
Michaux, Henri. "Aventures de lignes" (1954). In Passages, 113-17. Paris: Gallimard, 1963. 
--. A Barbarian in Asia. Translated by Sylvia Beach. New York: New Directions, 1949. 
--. "Danse." In Oeuvres completes, edited by Raymond Bellour and Yse Tran, 1:697-99. 
Paris: Gallimard, 1998. 
--. Darkness Moves: An Henri Michaux Anthology. Translated by David Ball. Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1997. 
--. "Dessiner l'ckoulement du temps" (1957). In Passages, 197-205. Paris: Gallimard, 
1963. 
--. Emergences/Resurgences. Translated by Richard Sieburth. New York: Skira/The 
Drawing Centre, 2000. 
--. Ideograms in China. Translated by GustafSobin. New York: New Directions, 2002. 
--. Mouvements. Paris: Gallimard, 1982. First published 1951. 
--. "Observations" (1950). In Passages, 91-101. Paris: Gallimard, 1963. 
--. Oeuvres completes. Edited by Raymond Bellour and Yse Tran. 2 vols. Paris: 
Gallimard, 1998. 
168 Bibliography 
--. "Quelques renseignements sur cinquante-neuf annees d'existence." In Henri 
Micllaux: Peinture et poesie, by Henri-Alexis Baatsch, 170-73. Paris: Hazan, 1993. 
--. Stroke by Stroke [with Grasp J. Translated by Richard Sieburth. Brooklyn: 
Archipelago, 2006. 
--. Tent Posts. Translated by Lynn Hoggard. Copenhagen: Green Integer, 1997. 
Mikkolainen, Terhi. "Cangjie-The Inventor of the Chinese Script." GBTimes,2013. 
https:/ / gbtimes.com/Jife/ cangjie-inventor-chinese-script. 
Molotiu, Andrei, ed. Abstract Comics: The Anthology. Seattle: Fantagraphics, 2009. 
--. "Abstract Form: Sequential Dynamism and Iconostasis in Abstract Comics 
and Steve Ditko's Amazing Spider-man." In Critical Approaches to Comics: Theories 
and Methods, edited by Matthew j. Smith and Randy Duncan, 84-100. New York: 
Routledge, 2012. 
Moritz, William. "The Films ofOskar Fischinger." Film Culture, nos. 58-60 (1974): 
37-188. 
Nancy, jean-Luc. Listening. Translated by Charlotte Mandell. New York: Fordham 
University Press, 2007. 
Newgarden, Mark, and Paul Karasik. "How to Read Nancy." In The Best of Ernie Bushmiller's 
NanC)'J edited by Brian Walker, 98-105. New York: Comicana Books, 1988. 
Noland, Carrie. "Miming Signing: Henri Michaux and the Writing Body." In Migrations of 
Gesture, edited by Carrie Noland and Sally Ann Hess, 133-84. Minneapolis: University 
of Minnesota Press, 2008. 
Nyman,John. "Artist's Statement;' january 7,2016. The Four Fundamental Concepts of 
Psycllo-Analysis: A Selection. https:/ /johnnymanwriting.wordpress.com. 
Parish, Nina. "Between Text and Image, East and West: Henri Michaux's Signs and 
Christian Dotremont's 'Logogrammes:" Revue des Litteratures de l'Union Europienne/ 
Review of Literatures of the European Union 8 (December 2008): 67-80. 
--. Henri Michaux: Experimentation with Signs. Amsterdam: Rodopi,2007. 
Pelard, Emanuelle. teLe Nomadisme du signe dans les 'pseudographies' de Christian 
Dotremont et d'Henri Michaux." Cygne noir: Revue d'exploration semiotique, no. 1 
(2013). 
Pincus-Witten, Robert. "Learning to Write" (1968). In Writings on Cy Twombly, edited by 
Nicola Del Roscio, 56-60. Munich: Schirmer/Mosel, 2002. 
Priest, Eldritch. Boring Fonnless Nonsense: Experimental Music and the Aesthetics of Failure. 
New York: Bloomsbury, 2013. 
Qpeneau, Raymond. Batons, chiffres et lettres. Paris: Gallimard, 1950. 
--. Ecritures. Edited by Tim Gaze and Christopher Skinner. King's Lynn, England: 
Secret Books, 2015. 
Raley, Rita. "The Asemic at the End of the World:' Paper presented at the annual meeting 
of the Modern Language Association, Philadelphia,January 2017. 
Rasula,Jed, and Steve McCaffery, eds.Imagining Language: An Anthology. Cambridge: 
MIT Press, 1998. 
Bibliography 169 
rawlings, angela. "Asemic Writing." Gibber, 2012. http://arawlings.is/gibber/essays 
/ asemlcwriting.pd£ 
Richter, Gerd. Comic Strip (1962). Cologne: Walther Konig, 2014. 
Roth, Nancy Ann. "Mira Schendel's Gesture: On Art in ViJem Plusser's Thought, with 
'Mira Schendel' by Flusser." Tate Papers} no. 21 (Spring 2014). http://www.tate.org.uk 
/ research/publications. 
Rotman, Brian. Becoming beside Ourselves: The Alphabet, Ghosts} and Distributed Human 
Being. Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 2008. 
Samigulina, Ekaterina. "Asemic 'Vriting/ Asemlc International: The Manifesto." 
Wikiversity, last edited April 2, 2016. https://en.wikiversity.org. 
--. Asemic Writing in the Woods. YouTube, 2011. https:/ /www.youtube.com. 
Sarraute, Nathalie. Tropisms. Translated by Maria Jolas. New York: George Braziller, 1963. 
Schwenger, Peter. '~bstract Comics and the Decomposition of Horror:' Horror Studies 2, 
no. 2 (2011): 265-80. 
--. "Codex Seraphinianus: Hallucinatory Encyclopedia:' SCRIPTjr.nl, December 8, 
2012. http://scriptjr.nl! special-sections. 
--. "Language Will Eat Your Brain." In Technologies of the Gothic in Literature and 
Culture, edited by Justin Edwards, 179-86. London: Routledge, 2015. 
--. "The Obbligato Effect." New Literary History 42 (2011): 115-28. 
Serafini, Luigi. Codex SeraplJinianus. New York: Rizzoli, 2013. 
Serota, Nicholas. "History behind the Thought:' Interview with Cy Twombly. In Cycles and 
Seasons, edited by Nicholas Serota, 43-53. London: Tate, 2008. 
Shklovsky, Victor. 'ht as Technique." In Russian Formalist Criticism: Four Essays} translated 
by Lee T. Lemon and MarionJ. Reis, 3-24. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 
1965. 
Sitwell, Edith. Preface to Collected Poems. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1930. 
Skinner, Christopher. Four Fools. King's Lynn, England: Lestaret, 2011. 
--. "Four Q!.Iestions about Asemlc Writing, # 10: Christopher Skinner." SCRIPTjr.nl, 
October 8, 2015. http://scriptjr.nl. 
--. An Isochronous Apologue. King's Lynn, England: Lestaret, 2018. 
--. Pabulum. King's Lynn, England: Lestaret, 2012. 
--. Underovary. King's Lynn, England: Lestaret, 2013. 
Sloan, De Villo. "Received: Eco-Asemics from Nancy Bell Scott (USA) + Vispology from 
Lorraine Kwan (Canada) & Neil Gordon's TrAshemics (USA):' International Union 
of Mail-Artists, February 13, 2012. http://iuoma-network.ning.com/profiles/blogs 
/ received-eco-asemlcs-more-from-nancy-bell-scott -vispology-from. 
Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty. Translator's preface to Of Grammatoiog)) by Jacques Derrida, 
ix-xc. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UniverSity Press, 1976. 
Stanley, Jeffrey. "To Read Images Not Words: Computer-Aided Analysis of the Handwriting in the Codex Seraphinianus." Master of science thesis, North Carolina State 
University, 2010. 
170 Bibliography 
Sylvester, David. "Cy Twombly." In Interviews with American Artists, 173-81. New Haven, 
Conn.: Yale University Press, 2001. 
"30 by Cecil Touchon:' minimalist concrete poetry. Accessed May 13, 2019. http://www 
.logolalia.com/ minimalistconcretepoetry / archives/ cat _ touchon _ cecil.html. 
Thoreau, Henry David. Walden. Edited by J. Lyndon Shanley. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton 
University Press, 1971. 
Tisseron, Serge. "All Writing Is DraWing: The Spatial Development of the Manuscript." Yale 
French Studies 84 (1994): 29-42. 
Touchon, Cecil. "Artist Statement." In "30 by Cecil Touchon." minimalist concrete poetry. 
Accessed May 13, 2019. http://www.logolalia.com/minimalistconcretepoetry/archives 
/ cat_ touchon _ ceciI.html. 
van Elburg, Marc. Grawlixes and tile Spiritual in Art. December 16, 2014. https://issuu.com 
/ ghoi4wtSyhwli8/ docs/ grawlixes _ marcvanelbur&-issuu. 
Varnedoe, Kirk. Cy Twombly: A RetrospectiVe. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1994. 
Villa, Emilio. "Cy 1Wombly" (1957-60), translated by Julia C. Ballerini. In Writings on Cy 
Twombly, edited by Nicola Del Roscio, 35-45. Munich: Schirmer/Mosel, 2002. 
Walker, Mort. The Lexicon of Comicana. Lincoln, Neb.: iUniverse.com, 2000. First published 1980. 
Wallace, David Foster. The Pale King. New York: Back Bay Books, 2012. 
Xu Bing. '~Artist's View." In Persistence/Transformation: Text as Image itl tile Art of Xu 
Bing) edited by Jerome Silbergeld and Dora C. Y. Ching, 99-111. Princeton, NJ.: 
Princeton University Press, 2006. 
--. Bookfrom the Ground: From Point to Point. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2014. 
--. "The Making of Book from the Sky," translated by Drew Hammond. In Tianshu: 
Passages in the Making of a Book, edited by Katherine Spears, 51-63. London: Bernard 
Q!laritch, 2009. 
ahstraction, 30, 89, 122,146, 155-56n3 
alphabet, 5-6, 12,14-15,83-84,98 
Appel, Rosaire, 68, 110-23, 134, 136-37, 
146-47 
Archilla, Casilda Garcia, 61, 76, 157nl 
asemia, 2 
asemic, origin of term, 1 
asemic movement, 16-17 
asemic writing: and abstract comics, 111; 
definition of, 1-2; as gesture, 116; and 
noise, 109; as universal language, 15-16 
Barthes, Roland, I, 13,31-42,97, 157n3; 
on cursivity, 4, 49; on Twombly, 43, 
45,49 
Benjamin, Walter, 13-14 
Berger, John, 47-49 
Bijlenga, Marian, 73 
Bing, Xu, 83, 93-100 
Blanchot, Maurice, 73, 80, 89,95 
body, 27, 156n7, 156n8; and language, 14 
Book of Nature, 65, 79 
Bucarelli, Palma, 45, 56 
calligraphy, 5, 73,102, 144, 158n11; Square 
Word Calligraph)1J 98-100 
Cangjie, 72-73, 79 
children's writing and drawing, 12-13,83, 
140, 149, 158nl 
Chinese characters, 72-73, 81-84, 88-91, 
95,97-100 
Chouinard, Marie, 27 
collage, 124-25 
INDEX 
comics, abstract, 11O-11} 114, 116} 122 
concrete poetry, 10, 124 
Cui Fei, 73-76, 91 
cursive: decline of, 3-4 
dance, 16}2S-28, 156n5 
da Vinci, Leonardo, 85 
decoding,71-72,83,118} 138-40, 158nl 
Dermisache} Mirtha, to, 16,34, 137 
Derrida,]acques, 1,42, 79} 84, 149-50 
Descartes, Rene, 82, 156n7 
Dotremont, Christian, 84-88, 98, 143} 
159n3 
drawing} 12; and thought} 147 
ductus, 49, S4 
Ely, Timothy, 141,143 
emotion, and gesture, 2S, 149 
emptiness,44; oflanguage, 40-42,44, 97 
erasure, 43,110, 155nl 
Ernst, Max, 20, 32, 101 
Faucher, Kane X., 138-40 
Fenollosa, Ernest, 82, 84, 88-89 
Flusser, Vilem, 5-10, 21i on the defamiliarization of writing, 5, 122; on gesture, 
25; on linearity, 61; on pre-writing, 147; 
on print, 127; on translation, 31; on the 
violence of writing, 109-10 
Jort-da game, 13 
Foucault, Michel, 65-66 
Freud, Sigmund, 13, 90 
Frith, Uta, 83 
171 
172 Index 
Gaze, Tim, 1-2, 12, 17,61,101 
gesture, 14, 107; interior, 24-25,116, 147, 
149; and meaning, 104; as origin of 
writing and drawing, 12-13; writing 
determined by, 13-14 
Gimeno, Pepe, 72, 157n4 
Giovenale, Marco, 156n9 
graffiti, 104-5 
graphic granite, 61,65 
graphism, 38 
graphology, 13-14 
haiku, 40-42, 
handwriting, 2-5; and drawing, 12; vs. 
print, 10; and 1\vombly, 56. See also 
graphology 
ideogram, 83-84, 15Sn2 
iIIegibility,2, 13, 137, 155nl; Bartbes on, 
32-34, 38-39; and Twombly, 45, 49 
image, 7, 10, 13, 17,20,110; inner, 14; 
visuo-kinetic, 25, 27, 155nl 
Ingold, Tim, 12, 117 
intentionality, 66-67 
jacobson, Michael, 1, 15-16,61,101-10, 
118; responses to his work, 146, 
148-49 
jacobus, Mary, 13, 43, 46 
joyce,james, 2 
Judd, Donald, 47, 59 
Kandinsky, WassiJy, 117, 146 
keyboard, 3, 83, 124 
Klee, Paul, 12, 20, 117, 155n2 
Lacan, jacques, 125 
language, 14,49,67,71-72,81; as categorizing, 21,24, 39, 91; Chinese, 88-90, 
97; as "cribriform," 143; emptiness 
of,40-42,97; as instrumental, 36; 
material, 125, 138; as matte, 41; and 
meaning, 32, 39-40, 65, 79; policing 
by, IS, 19; universal, 15-16,82,84; 
visual, 116-17 
Latour, Bruno, 80 
Leibniz, Gottfried \'\Tilhelm, 82 
left-handedness, 45, 156nl 
Leftwich,jim, 1-2,68, 108,124,136,150 
Leroi-Gourhan, Andre, 5 
letters, alphabetical, 4-5, 14,66,83, 
124-25; by Twombly, 43 
Lettrism,155nl 
linearity, 6-7, 20,49,61,98; Twombly on, 
47 
logogram, 83-84,143-44, 155n2 
MalJarme, Stephane, 27,44 
marks: Appel on, 116-22; by Ely, 143; 
as gestures, 24-25; and meaning, 7, 
98-100, 143; materiality of, 124, 134; 
and space, 13; writing as, 66-67, 79 
matte, 41 
McLuhan, Marshall, 6 
meaning: in asemic writing, 17; Barthes 
on, 32,38-42, 157n3; Derrida on, 147; 
and intention, 66-67j gestural, 68, 104; 
impulse towards, 70-71, 127; language 
and, 40, 65; and materiality, 109; seme 
as, 1; as trace, 79 
Michaux, Henri, 19-32; on calligraphy, 
158nl1; on children's SCribbling, 13; 
and comics, 115-16; and Dotremont, 
143, 159n3; Ideograms in China, 81-90; 
influence on Barthes, 31-32; on interior 
gestures, 147-48; left-handedness, 
156nl1 
Molotiu, Andrei, 11, 114 
movement: of the hand, 12,46, 54! 147, 
156n7; interior, 30-31,147-48; 
Ntichauxand,24-28 
Nancy,jean-Luc,117 
noise, 108-9 
notation, 12, 117-18, 122; John Cage's 
Notations, 117; dance notation, 27-28; 
musical notation, 117 
Nyman,John} 125, 127 
phonogram, 83, 143 
pictogram,83,143 
Pincus-Witten, Robert} 4S, 56, 59 
play, 149-50 
Pound, Ezra, 82, 88, 100 
print, 10, 14,85, 127} 129 
Proust, Marcel, 36 
Queneau, Raymond, 136 
Raley, Rita, 15 
rawlings, angela, 68, 70-71} 76, 157n4 
Ray, Man, 61 
reading: Appel on reading/looking, 112, 
118; associative, 148; authority of, 127; 
eco-asemic, 80-81; habitual nature of, 
146; inevitability of, 150; Leftwich on, 
68; of pre-writing, 147 
Richter, Gerhard, 141 
Rongorongo,101-2 
Rotman, Brian,S, 14, 25} 93 
Schendel, Mira, 8-10,17,30 
Scott, Nancy Bell, 61 
seal script, 88, 91 
seme,1 
Serafini, Luigi, 138-40, 158-59nl 
signification, 1,21,150. See also meaning 
signs, 2, 21, 28-31, 150; Buccarelli on, 46; 
dance and, 27; as gestures, 21; as material markings, 124; natures, 65, 71,81 
Skinner, Christopher, 16-17, 124-36, 159n2 
Smith, Helene, 158n3 
sound, 108-9 
speech, 14 
Steinberg, Saul,32} 49,141 
Sulger-Buel} Romaric} 32, 39 
texture, 132-34, 148 
Thoreau, Henry David, 70 
Index 173 
thought, 4; Flusser on, 6-7; pre-thought, 
21} 147-48; as reflexes} l20i shaped by 
writing, 109, 147; writing as instrument 
of, 36 
Tisseron, Serge, 12-13,147 
Touchon, Cecil, 124-25 
trac~32,79-80,149 
translation, 31, 144, 147 
Twombly, Cy, 43-60; blackboard paintings, 
56-59; Letter of Resignation, 46-56; 
Virgil, 43-45 
type (typefaces), 10,72,94-95,126-27, 
129-32 
typewriter} 124, 136 
Villa, Emilio, 44-45, 156n9 
Voynich manuscript, 12, 101 
Walker, Mort, 115, 122 
Wallace, David Foster, 79 
'Wenda Gu,91-93 
whiteness: of the page, 42; in Twombly, 
43-45, 54} 56, 156nl0 
wild cursive, 73, 8S 
writing, 147; Chinese, 81-100; colored, 
37; as cursivity, 4, 49; defamiliarizing 
of, Si and drawing, 12, 117, 147; as 
emptiness, 41-42, 97; as image, 13; as 
incision, 109-10; as instrumental, 36} 
38; and intentionality, 66-67; and linearity, 6, 61; by nature, 61, 70; origin of, 
73; speed of, 36-37; and trace, 76-79. 
See also cursive; handWriting 
Xu Bing, 136,149; Bookfrom the Ground, 
83; Bookfrom the Sky (Tianshu),93-97; 
Square Word Calligraphy, 98-100 
Zen, 39,41-42 
Peter Schwenger is professor emeritus of English at Mount St. Vincent 
University and resident fellow of the Centre for the Study of Theory and 
Criticism at the University of Western Ontario. His books The Tears of 
Things: Melancholy and Physical Objects and At the Borders of Sleep: On 
Liminal Literature were both published by the University of Minnesota Press. 
