Title: Book Reviews Contemporary Iranian Rt From the Street to the Studio
Author: Talinn Grigor
Orientations I Volume 49 Number 2 I MARCH/APRIL 201 8 
144 
Book Revi ews 
Contemporary Iranian Art: From the Street to the Studio 
ByTalinn Grigor 
London : Reaktion Books, 20~4 
Softcover, 296 pages, ~74 illustrations, ~64 in colour 
ISBN 978~780232706 
Price: £25 
Since the late ~980s, the contemporary art world 
has extended beyond the fringes of 'Western 
art' and moved towards the exploration of new 
geographies, recognizing artistic practice in regions 
that have been ignored by art historians, critics 
and curators alike. One of the art scenes that has 
witnessed a surge of interest in recent years is that 
of Iran and the Persian Gulf. Iranian modern and 
contemporary visual culture is vibrant, aesthetically 
diverse and technically dynamic, and a reflection of 
the turbulent socio-cultural and political atmosphere, 
which became the core of Iranian artistic practice . 
This book presents a critical perspective on the 
history of Iranian visual culture since the ~978-79 
Revolution. It is divided into three parts-'The 
Street', 'The Studio' and 'The Exile'-providing a 
comprehensive study of art under the regime of the 
Islamic Republici of the art scene, from its creation 
in the studios to its display in public galleries and 
museumsi and of the transcultural dialogue of Iranian 
artists in the diaspora, and discussing the ideologies, 
institutions and individuals involved through the lens 
of the conceptual dichotomies of high art/light art, 
private/public domains and expression/censorship. 
In the prologue, the author explains the study's 
structure and scope. 'The Street' deals with the 
official art commissioned by the Islamic Republic, 
linking ideology and the public domaini 'The Studio' 
relates to the avant-garde, manifested by artists in 
the private domain of galleries and museumsi and 
the third section focuses on diasporic artistic activity, 
both within the immigrant communities and in 
conversation with the Western art scene. 
Presenting a historicized perspective on Iran's 
visual culture, the author posits that during the 
two periods before the establishment of the 
Islamic Republic in ~979, the Qajar and the Pahlavi 
constructed a utopian monument to the Persian 
legacy, from the Achaemenids to the Safavids, to 
promote an anti-colonial dominion. However, she 
emphasizes that during the 50 years of Pahlavi 
rule there was nevertheless a strong commitment 
to modernize Iran, taking the Western world as a 
reference. 
The first chapter, 'The Street', focuses on 
the ideological agenda of revolutionary art to 
obliterate the secular and modernist environment 
established by the Pahlavi under the influence 
of Western culture. The author distinguishes an 
aesthetic shift within four political periods (p. 23). 
First, under the leadership of Imam Khomeini, 
revolutionary art, categorized by the author as 
populist and propagandistic, followed the language 
of academic realism to re-educate the masses based 
on Shi'a-Iranian moral principles and rejection of 
the monarchy and Western culture. Then, during 
the presidency of Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, 
the agenda was the reconstruction of the Shi'aIranian Islamic community. Between 1997 and 2005, 
President Khatami initiated a reform movement 
towards artistic freedom, internationalization of 
the arts and urban beautification, along with the 
revitalization of state museums and the opening of 
several galleries. Lastly, under President Mahmoud 
Ahmadinejad and his conservative regime, the 
Iranian art scene became more lethargic. 
The author relates the initial stage of Iran's 
revolutionary street art to the revolutionary and 
anti-colonial traditions in the Soviet Union, China, 
Cuba and Mexico. This stage is marked by a spirit 
of freedom and by clandestine activity, such as the 
use of graffiti, posters and other forms of street art 
intervention, which then evolved into official murals. 
Their subject-matter was mostly related to antiUS propaganda, the faqih or jurist's guardianship of 
the Supreme Leader Imam Khomeini, the export of 
the Iranian Revolution and support for international 
Muslim causes, and the development ofShi'a 
iconography and martyrology in the context ofthe 
Iran-Iraq War. 
As Grigor underlines, there appears to have 
been t wo distinct arenas in the public domain: 
one amongst the population, which developed 
spontaneously and anonymously, vibrant in 
its visual communication; and the other more 
institutionalized, which involved the reconfiguration 
of public spaces. She relates the swing towards 
a more institutionalized revolutionary art to the 
international political arena in the context of the 
Iran-Iraq War between 1980 and 1988 and the 
internationalization of Iran's Revolution to include 
other Islamic countries in the Persian Gulf. 
Grigor sees a political shift in the arts of the 
revolution during what is called the Second Republic 
(1989-2005). She identifies a series of murals 
representing a new pictorial discourse focused 
on Iran-Iraq Wa r veterans as a celebration of their 
sacrifice in the name ofthe Revolution, which 
commemorate t he vetera ns' survival and resistance. 
She also identifies t he rise of a new category of 
murals in the early 2000S in connec ion ith urban 
development and the continuous reconstruction of 
Tehran, moving away from martyrdom andfaqih to 
a new pictorial discourse of resistance characterized 
by the illusion of a three-dimensional space and the 
employment oftrompe l'oeil techniques . 
The second chapter discusses the significant 
aesthetic shifts in artistic production within the 
studios and the emergence of a new generation 
of artists during the Second Republic. This chapter 
examines the duality of the publ ic and private 
spheres, the instrumentalization of painting in the 
context of the cultural revolution, the abandonment 
of a core revolutionary discourse towards the 
development of avant-garde groups who paid 
attention to international vanguards, and the 
creation of boundaries between self-censorship and 
CUSTO DIANS O F THE SCHOLAR'S WAY 
Chinese Scholar's Objects in Precious Woods 
MARCUS FLACKS 
LANGUAGE: CHINESE 
490 PAGES, HARDCOVER 
OVER 300 COLOR AND 
BIW IMAGES 
315 X 260MM 
RMB 1580.00 I USD 258.00 
ISBN 978 7 50104781 9 
PUBLICATION DATE: 
DECEMBER 2017 
PUBLISHER: *EI pl~~Hj;ml!l1i!j 
CULTURAL RELICS PRESS & FOR CUSTOM ERS IN 
PARAGON BOOK GALLERY CHINA. l>l~~ ~CAN 
[!) ~",:,arr: [!) 
'!r, .!J.~~"~~ r.~~~;~ ~~ FOR MORE DETAILS 
AND PURCHASI G 
INFORMATION. 
PLEASE SEE: 
PARAGO BOOK..CO !. [!)~ 
~: ~ .. . .~ 
Orientations I Volume 49 Number 2 I MARCH/APRIL 2018 
tolerated and banned art. The author also highlights 
the growing diaspora of artists 'forced' into exile as 
a result of political and religious shifts in the Islamic 
Republic. 
As part ofthe political agenda and the search 
for a true Iranian identity, artists condemned the 
mimicking of Western art and encouraged Islamic 
abstraction and the pursuit of 'spiritual-intuitive' art. 
Grigor suggests that in the mid-~980s, art schools 
were instrumental in revamping the educational 
structure to divorce art and politics and to 'cleanse' 
the Western influences popular during the Pahlavi 
regime. She also discusses the importance of 
documentary photography as a 'weapon' to fight for 
the 'integrity of the Islamic Republic' and to develop 
a culture of martyrdom (p. 110). 
The second part of the second chapter looks at 
the dichotomy between the private and the public 
space in the context of government-owned galleries, 
museums, nationalized palaces, private galleries and 
artists'. studios. In regard to the public display of art 
in state-owned galleries and museums, the author 
argues that although the government acts as the 
custodian of moral behaviour, censorship can never 
be absolute. Even Western art is at times displayed. 
The criteria of censorship are vague and in constant 
flux. Based on interviews with Iranian artists, Grigor 
demonstrates the strong links between censorship 
and artistic productionj censorship does not forbid 
an artist to create an artwork but simply determines 
whether it can be displayed in public, generating a 
proliferation of private galleries and an increase in 
private exhibitions organized by artists' studios. The 
author also suggests that economically privileged, 
socially emancipated and educated women have 
played a significant role in the establishment of 
private galleries. A great majority of these galleries 
have been managed by women and served 'as the 
liminal spaces that negotiate the complexity of the 
relation between the public domain and the art 
world' (p. ~40). 
The third and final chapter concentrates on the 
artistic production of Iranian artists in exile, largely 
in North America and Western Europe. The author 
examines the cultural dialogues and the sense of 
exilic in-betweenness of Iranian artists who feel 
detached from both their home and host countries. 
In their diasporic artistic discourse, Grigor sees a 
different picture of Iran and Iranian identity from 
that ofthe Islamic Republic. This contested truth is 
neither Western nor 'Islamic' in the sense that it is not 
substantiated by a Western perspective or directly 
affected by the agenda of the cultural revolution 
steered by the Islamic Republic. 
The author points to several reasons for 
the integration of the Iranian diasporic artistic 
community into the international art scene, such as 
the importance of the Iranian Revolution and the 
Iran-Iraq War in world politics, the oil boom in the 
2000S, which contributed to the generation of an 
artistic patronage in the Persian Gulf states, and the 
'poignant questions about fragmented identities, 
gender equality, diasporic loss and historical 
reflexivity' that Iranian visual culture imposed both 
inside and outside Iran (p. 166). 
The last section of the chapter analyses the 
'reconciliation' between the Islamic Republic and the 
Iranian artistic community in diaspora, especially 
since the efforts made in the late 1990S by President 
Khatami to initiate a cultural dialogue. The author 
relates the restructuring of the Ministry of Culture 
and Islamic Guidance and the Tehran Museum of 
Contemporary Art during Khatami's first term in 
office to the international development of Iranian 
contemporary art. She further notes the escalation 
of interest in Iranian contemporary artists on the 
part of scholars, curators and critics after a major 
exhibition at the Barbican Centre in London (2001) 
and another in at the Meridian International Center 
in Washington, DC (2002). Grigor suggests that 
the packaging of Iranian contemporary art by the 
international art market as 'Iranian and Arab art' or 
'contemporary Middle Eastern art' followed on from 
this greater exposure. 
Talinn Grigor's book gives an authoritative 
overview of contemporary Iranian art after the 
Revolution, analysing tensions between artistic 
practice in the studios, the fabrication of a new 
iconography and the instrumentalization of art in the 
service of politics, and the dislocation of a diasporic 
artistic community. It offers an in-depth perspective 
on the surge of interest in new geographies of visual 
culture and the intense effect that world politics and 
political and religious propaganda exert on artistic 
production, and on the rise of new opportunities in 
the international art market. 
Rui Oliveira Lopes 
Rui Oliveira Lopes is assistant professor of global art 
history in the Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences, 
Universiti Brunei Darussalam. 
Monks in Glaze: Patronage, Kiln Origin and Iconography of the Yixian Luohans 
By Eileen Hsiang-Ling Hsu 
Boston: Brill, 2016 
Hardcover, 269 pages, over 130 colour illustrations 
ISBN 9789004335844 
Price: US$139 
Among the many works of Chinese sculpture in 
museums today, the Yixian luohan Carhats') 
are remarkable: they are slightly larger than lifesize hand-modelled ceramic images of Buddhist 
holy men seated on rock-like platforms and covered 
in a sancai, orthree-colour, glaze. Anyone who 
has wandered into the Chinese galleries at The 
Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York orThe 
Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art in Kansas City, not 
to mention the Musee Guimet in Paris, the Royal 
Ontario Museum in Toronto or the Penn Museum in 
Philadelphia, has undoubtedly passed by one of this 
group of ten extant sculptures, if not been drawn to 
it-their portrait-like visages compel the visitor to 
come closer. Yet while many have seen these works, 
few have studied them. Eileen Hsiang-Ling Hsu's 
work Monks in Glaze: Patronage, Kiln Origin and 
Iconography of the Yixian Luohans now fills this gap. 
Combining earlier work done by independent 
scholar Richard Smithies and Derek Gillman, formerly 
the executive director of the Barnes Foundation, with 
newly found textual sources and her own fieldwork 
at the Yixian site in Hebei province, Hsu takes the 
reader through the process of production of the 
images, argues for a specific patron, and gives a 
logical rationale for their unusual placement in caves 
high in the hills 150 kilometres outside of Beijing. 
Along the way, she weaves in the story of their 
initial discovery by the German explorer Friedrich 
Perzynski (1877-1965) at the turn of the 20th century, 
stripping away the layers of his own misinformation 
and later misinterpretations to lay bare some basic 
truths about the luohan. Hsu convincingly argues 
for a new dating for the grouping from the earlier 
Liao (907-1125) or Jin (1115-1234) dynasty to the 
much later Ming dynasty (1368-1644), wrappi ng 
her evidence in a broader discussion of some largely 
unstudied ceramic architectural works known as liuli 
from the Yuan (1271-1368), Ming and Qing (1644-
1911) dynasties. Correctly asserting the use of t his 
term for glaze or 'anything with a glass-like surface', 
Hsu notes that the term liuli long predates the term 
sancai, which only came into common usage in the 
early 20th century with the advent of the antiquities 
trade in Tang dynasty (618-907) ceramics (p. 39). Her 
new dating of the Yi xian works is further supported 
by recent chemical analysis and newly found stele 
texts, all of wh ich are discussed in Chapter 1. Hsu 
outlines the history of liuli in Chapter 2, after which 
she moves on to an in-depth study of Ming dynasty 
tricolour-glazed ceramic sculptural works in Chapter 
3, covering a broad range of materials from roof 
tiles and roofline sculptures to freestanding works. 
In her final two chapters, Hsu revisits the history 
and iconography of the luohan cult in China and 
seeks to identify each of the extant Yixian luohan by 
comparing them to other contemporaneous painted 
and sculpted works. 
Monks in Glaze is scholarly in tone yet highly 
readable . Hsu brings to light new materials relevant 
to acquiring a better understanding of the history 
behind these unique works . The most important 
is a marble stele dated 1519 that was recently 
discovered near the Yixian caves and outlines a 'great 
donation' made by a member ofthe local military 
elite, Song Jun (p. 27). Song Jun is posited as the 
major donor of the Yixian luohan group, his unique 
position within the Yizhou garrison enabling him not 
only to produce the set at a government kiln site, 
but also to aid in transporting the statues from the 
kiln site to the caves. Hsu also discusses the private 
industry of ceramic production during the Ming, in 
particular the possibility for ceramicists to work parttime to satisfy public demand for goods in lieu of 
corvee labour (p. 65), and by outlining the family147 
Orientat ions I Vol ume 49 Number 2 I MARCH/APRIL 201 8 
tolerated and banned art. The author also highlights 
the growing diaspora of artists 'forced' into exile as 
a result of political and religious shifts in the Islamic 
Republic. 
As part ofthe political agenda and the search 
for a true Iranian identity, artists condemned the 
mimicking of Western art and encouraged Islamic 
abstraction and the pursuit of , spiritual-intuitive' art. 
Grigor suggests that in the mid-1980s, art schools 
were instrumental in revamping the educational 
structure to divorce art and politics and to 'cleanse' 
the Western influences popular during the Pahlavi 
regime . She also discusses the importance of 
documentary photography as a 'weapon' to fight for 
the 'integrity of the Islamic Republic' and to develop 
a culture of martyrdom (p. 110). 
The second part of the second chapter looks at 
the dichotomy between the private and the public 
space in the context of government-owned galleries, 
museums, nationalized palaces, private galleries and 
artists' studios. In regard to the public display of art 
in state-owned galleries and museums, the author 
argues that although the government acts as the 
custodian of moral behaviour, censorship can never 
be absolute. Even Western art is at times displayed . 
The criteria of censorship are vague and in constant 
flux. Based on interviews with Iranian artists, Grigor 
demonstrates the strong links between censorship 
and artistic production; censorship does not forbid 
an artist to create an artwork but simply determines 
whether it can be displayed in publiC, generating a 
proliferation of private galleries and an increase in 
private exhibitions organized by artists' studios. The 
author also suggests that economically privileged, 
socially emancipated and educated women have 
played a significant role in the establishment of 
private galleries. A great majority of these galleries 
have been managed by women and served 'as the 
liminal spaces that negotiate the complexity of the 
relation between the public domain and the art 
world' (p. 140). 
The third and final chapter concentrates on the 
artistic production of Iranian artists in exile, largely 
in North America and Western Europe. The author 
examines the cultural dialogues and the sense of 
exilic in-betweenness of Iranian artists who feel 
detached from both their home and host countries . 
In their diasporic artistic discourse, Grigor sees a 
different picture of Iran and Iranian identity from 
that of the Islamic Republic. This contested truth is 
neither Western nor 'Islamic' in the sense that it is not 
substantiated by a Western perspective or directly 
affected by the agenda of the cultural revolution 
steered by the Islamic Republic. 
The author points to several reasons for 
the integration of the Iranian diasporic artistic 
community into the international art scene, such as 
the importance ofthe Iranian Revolution and the 
Iran-Iraq War in world politiCS, the oil boom in the 
2000S, which contributed to the generation of an 
artistic patronage in the Persian Gulf states, and the 
'poignant questions about fragmented identities, 
gender equality, diasporic loss and historical 
reflexivity' that Iranian visual culture imposed both 
inside and outside Iran (p. 166). 
The last section of the chapter analyses the 
'reconciliation' between the Islamic Republic and the 
Iranian artistic community in diaspora, especially 
since the efforts made in the late 1990S by President 
Khatami to initiate a cultural dialogue. The author 
relates the restructuring of the Ministry of Culture 
and Islamic Guidance and the Tehran Museum of 
Contemporary Art during Khatami's first term in 
office to the international development of Iranian 
contemporary art. She further notes the escalati on 
of interest in Iranian contemporary artists on the 
part of scholars, curators and critics after a major 
exhibition at the Barbican Centre in London (2001) 
and another in at the Meridian International Center 
in Washington, DC (2002). Grigor suggests that 
the packaging of Iranian contemporary art by the 
international art market as 'Iranian and Arab art' or 
'contemporary Middle Eastern art' followed on from 
this greater exposure. 
Talinn Grigor's book gives an authoritative 
overview of contemporary Iranian art after the 
Revolution, analysing tensions between artistic 
practice in the studios, the fabrication of a new 
iconography and the instrumentalization of art in he 
service of politiCS, and the dislocation of a diasporic 
artistic community. It offers an in-depth perspect i e 
on the surge of interest in new geographies of visual 
culture and the intense effect that world politics an 
political and religious propaganda exert on artistic 
production, and on the rise of new opportunities in 
the international art market. 
Rui Oliveira La 
Rui Oliveira Lopes is ass istant professor of global art 
history in the Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences, 
Unive rsiti Brunei Daruss alam. 
