Title: A Literati Dialogue The Collaborative Art of Arnold Chang and Michael Cherney
Orientations I Volume 49 Number 2 I MARCH/APRIL 2018 
118 
A Literati Dialogue: 
The Collaborative Art of 
Arnold Chang and Michael Cherney 
Julia F. Andrews and Kuiyi Shen 
Many of the classics of Chinese poetry, 
. calligraphy and painting were originally 
no more than brief episodes in an intellectual or 
aesthetic conversation between two artists, writers 
or scholars. Only occasionally intended as cultural 
monuments or masterpieces, they appeared in 
the moment of dialogue, when a writer or an 
artist composed a matched poem, a calligraphic 
frontispiece to a painting, a pictorial response or 
even a humorous riposte to a colleague's text . Such 
spontaneous aesthetic and spiritual communications 
did not need to be immediate or even to take 
place at the same event, but might capture in 
ink on paper the meeting of minds separated by 
vast distances. Poems, paintings and prose that 
documented responses to both philosophical and 
personal sentiments were conveyed back and forth 
by messenger and mail between close friends kept 
physically apart by duty and circumstance. Paintings 
now familiar to a wide public were often intended, 
at least initially, for the eyes and heart of just one 
appreciative fellow spirit. 
The literati dialogue was, of course, the product 
of China's profound literary and artistic culture, and 
extended geographically as far as its practitioners 
might be scattered. The shared practice of capturing 
poetic, philosophical and painted compositions in 
indelible ink has preserved archival fragments of 
more than a millennium of such conversations. With 
the gradual disappearance of the classical practice 
of poetry and the evolution from writing brush 
to pen to keyboard by the late 20th century, such 
material traces have become increasingly rare . The 
artistic collaboration of Arnold Chang (Zhang Hong) 
and Michael Cherney (Qiu Mai) is a contemporary 
version of the literati dialogue, one that crosses the 
entire globe, from Beijing to New York and back 
again . 
Chinese-American artist Arnold Chang is an 
accomplished and erudite contemporary practitioner 
of Chinese ink painting in the scholarly tradition. 
Beijing-based American phot<?grapher Michael 
Cherney, through a sensitive manipulation of images 
and materials, creates work similarly imbued with the 
Chinese literati aesthetic. The two artists were both 
born in New York City, Chang in ~954 and Cherney in 
~969. They first met and appreciated one another's 
work when they exhibited in the 2007 Chengdu 
Biennial. Cherney showed several accordion-folded 
albums of photos printed on Xuan paper, and Chang 
showed paintings that stood out for the elegance of 
the brushwork and the subtlety of the composition. 
After exhibiting together in other group exhibitions, 
Chang and Cherney decided in 2009 to experiment 
with an artistic collaboration. 
Although in contemporary parlance we would call 
their working process a collaboration, it is in many 
ways an evocation ofthe great poetic dialogues 
of China's cultural history. Cherney, who travels 
extensively throughout China to take photographs, 
initiates each piece of their collaboration by choosing 
a radically cropped photograph to print on slightly 
textured Xuan paper well suited to painting. He 
shoots his photographs in black-and-white on high-
speed 3smm film/ and they are then processed 
as slides/ cropped/ digitized/ blown up and finally 
printed in his studio in Beijing. He had long printed 
his transformed photographic fragments on Chinese 
paper/ leading most viewers to see in them direct 
parallels to Chinese painting. For the purposes of this 
collaboration/ however/ he has learned how to print 
digitally on the Chinese painting paper preferred by 
Chang/ and usually prints the first small image as a 
hard-edged form surrounded by ample blank space. 
He then mails the printed sheets to Chang's studio 
near New York/ and Chang gradually composes 
responses to those images that speak to him (Figs l 
and 2). 
Although the two artists share a love of classical 
Chinese painting/ from a technical perspective their 
work could not be more different. Chang typically 
builds a coherent landscape composition stroke by 
stroke/ while Cherney deconstructs a photographic 
landscape image by reducing it to blurred lines 
and dots. The granular textures in Cherney'S 
monochromatic images evoke the autographic 
Fig. 1 Perspectives #~ 
By Arnold Chang (b. 1954) and Michael Cherney (b. 1969), 2015 
Ink painting and photographic print on paper, 60 x 147 cm 
Private Collection 
brush strokes of classical Chinese painting : he 
captures external images with the blink of his shutter. 
Chang allows landscapes to slowly emerge from his 
heart/ mind and brush. 
Chang suggested in an interview that he 
finds freedom in this dialogue to fully exploit the 
art historical traditions in which he is so deeply 
grounded: ' ... ratherthan trying to imitate precisely 
the effect that Michael's granulated photos have/ I 
realized that I'm not trying to paint to make it look 
like a Michael Cherney photograph. What I'm trying 
to do is paint those Chinese paintings that Michael's 
work reminds us of' (From 2 Arises 3/ 20l4/ p. 32). 
This/ of course/ is only possible for an artist with a 
great knowledge of art historical tradition. 
Chang's interest in Chinese painting was inspired 
when/ at the age of 9/ he visited an exhibition of 
Zhang Daqian's (l899-l983) paintings in New York 
with his father. When he asked to learn to paint/ 
his father arranged for him to study painting and 
calligraphy with the renowned Shanghai artist Wang 
Jiyuan (l893-l97S)/ who lived in their Manhattan 
Orientations I Volume 49 Number 2 I MARCH/APRIL 2o~8 
120 
Fig. 2 P·erspectives #2 
By Arnold Chang (b. 1954) and Michael Chern ey (b. 1969), 2015 
Ink painting and photographic print on paper, 60 x 147 cm 
Private Collection 
neighbourhood. After graduating from The Bronx 
High School of Science, he renewed his interest in 
Chinese calligraphy by majoring in East Asian studies 
at the University of Colorado. He then studied 
traditional Chinese painting with Guo Yanqiao (1919-
2015) in Taiwan and went on to graduate school 
at the University of California, Berkeley, where he 
studied Chinese art history with James Cahill (1926-
2014). It was through Cahill's introduction that Chang 
met the artist, connoisseur and collector C. C. Wang 
(Wang Jiqian; 1907-2003), who was to be his painting 
teacher for the following quarter century. Chang's 
painting is informed by his knowledge of premodern 
Chinese painting, but for him tradition must speak 
as much to the future as to the past. 'There is a 
misconception about tradition,' he explains, '[which 
is] that people think tradition means "past". But 
actually, tradition is ongoing, and the opposite of 
tradition is not contemporary. One can be both 
contemporary and traditional, and in fact, in order 
to reall y understand the tradition it is imperative 
that you find a way to make it relevant and make it 
continue into the present and into the future' (Fu 
Oiumeng Fine Art, 2016). 
Cherney, who was intrigued with Asia from 
childhood after listening to stories told by family 
friends from Hong Kong, Taiwan and Japan, 
studied Chinese and EastAsian history atThe State 
University of New York at Binghamton and in Taiwan. 
He then moved to Beijing, which has been his home 
since 1991. His interest in Chinese language and 
history and his long residence in China have given 
him an appreciation of its classical traditions and 
a passion for its great early landscape paintings. 
Unlike Chang, he chose to invo lve himself with the 
tradition not through the medium of painting but 
through photography. Cherney traces the beginning 
of his artistic practice to a period of recovery from 
a severe illness in 1993, which 'led to a desire to be 
more appreciative of life as well as more observant 
of my surroundings' (Tung, 2003). Coincidentally, 
a book about the work of his grandfather, Charles 
Hoff (1905-75), an award-winning photographer for 
the New York Daily News, was published during that 
period. The legacy of his grandfather inspired him to 
'utilize the camera as a tool for proving to myself that 
I was thoroughly understanding what I was seeing in 
the world around me' (ibid.). 
The works of both artists, although executed in 
different media, are imbued with an aesthetic of 
restraint and a subtle elegance that is parallel to the 
best of classical Chinese painting. Chang's paintings, 
with a contemporary feeling conveyed by his slightly 
surreal landscape compositions, are perfectly in 
harmony hanging in museum galleries alongside 
Yuan (D7~-~368) or Ming (~368-~644) dynasty 
masterpieces. Cherney's appreciation of classical 
Chinese art is evident in the textures and imagery 
of his work. Moreover, he has an acute sensitivity 
to the affective power of the mounting formats of 
traditional Chinese painting, and his photographs, 
mounted as accordion albums, handscrolls or 
hanging scrolls, exploit their potential in highly 
contemporary ways. 
Nevertheless, a shared interest in Chinese 
painting does not provide a method by which a 
photograph and a painting can be productively 
jOi ned . The images and the shapes that Cherney lays 
out are, in fact, potentially quite challenging for a 
Chinese painter. In one example, he has cropped 
a spectacular mountain expanse into a broad 
inverted triangle. A striking image in its own right, 
it presented Chang with a geometric form never 
seen in Chinese painting, one perhaps conceived in 
reference to principles of RenaiSSance perspective. 
The painter responded twice. In the first work, he 
casually extended the image with a few matching 
mountains below the triangle (see Fig. ~). While such 
an abruptly cropped panorama seems to cry out 
for supplementation, the effect of Chang's sparse 
but artfully positioned additions is completely 
unexpected-by employing soft texture strokes, 
mists and fog to break the boundary created by 
the triangle's two short sides, he has expanded the 
scene infinitely, contradicting the apparent intention 
of the photograph's hard-edged geometry with his 
fluid natural forms. In the second instance, Chang 
turned the photograph upside down, prioritizing his 
own painting and converting the printed image into 
a reflection of his painted mountainscape (see Fig . 
2). The atmospheric perspective barely noticeable in 
the first photograph is now conspicuous, readable as 
strange hills or beaches along a shoreline. Moreover, 
the entire composition, now viewed frontally rather 
f,I~"'" 
.. . 
Fig. 3 Landscape with Waterfalls 
By Arnold Chang (b . 95 ) and Mi chae l Chern ey (b. 969) , 20 6 
In k painting and photographi c print on pa pe r, ~4 4 x 60 cm 
Private Collecti on 
~ 
Ori ent ati ons I Vo lume 49 Num ber 2 I MARCH/APRIL 20~8 
122 
than from above, remains constrained by the long 
side of the triangle rather than infinitely expanded 
as in the previous piece. In these two works Chang 
has directly commented on Cherney's art, and on 
the relationship of their common endeavour to the 
history of Chinese painting. 
Fig. 5 Plateaus 
By Arnold Chang (b. 1954) and 
Michae l Cherney (b. 1969), 2012 
Ink pa inting an d ph ot ograph ic 
print on paper, 56 x 74 cm 
Pri vate Coll ection 
Other cropped images present different kinds 
of challenges. In a few instances, Cherney's choice 
of image seems to offer a direct commentary 
on Chang's previous paintings. For example, he 
sent a sheet on which he had printed images of 
waterfalls, a motifthat appears in most early 
Fig. 4 Da Ming Mountain ~ 
By Arno ld Ch ang (b. 1954) and 
Michae l Ch erney (b. 1969), 2016 
Ink pa inting and phot ographic 
print on paper, 60 x 72 cm 
i1il! Private Collection 
~ 
Chinese monumental landscape paintings, as though 
inviting Chang to make a painting that might look 
like one of his own earlier works (Fig. 3). Rather 
than responding conventionally, however, Chang 
pushed back, completely avoiding such a centred 
composition by opening the middle of the picture 
into a large lake and deconstructing the conventional 
landscape. In another piece, Cherney cropped the 
landscape to leave only a perfectly framed and 
balanced image of a tall, rectangular mountain 
peak that seems complete in itself (Fig. 4). What 
could a painter possibly add to this? Chang again 
overturned expectations by surrounding Cherney's 
photograph with mountains that lean to the left and 
right, destabilizing and animating the previously 
perfect central mountain. No longer the tallest 
of the peaks, it still serves the crucial function of 
lending its silhouette to those that surround and 
echo it. Cherney launched an even greater challenge 
in the format of the folding fan-a standard shape 
in Chinese painting, particularly for artists of the 
Suzhou area, to which Chang'S style might be traced 
(Fig. 5). Typically, a landscape fan would leave ample 
blank space forthe addition of poetic commentsj yet 
this image is so densely packed with dark, abstract 
forms that there is no room to add anything to it. In 
this case, Chang transforms the scene below the fan's 
arc into a balanced rectangular landscape, diffusing 
some of the photograph's uncomfortable tension 
and even disguising the fan format altogether. Here, 
Cherney'S images can be read as challenges to the 
classical tradition of Chinese painting, or in some 
cases, as direct references to Chang'S body of work. 
The collaborative Mountain Fire has a particularly 
contemporary feel (Fig . 6). The luminous rocky 
surface emerging from the dark and densely textured 
mountain facade at its centre seems to exemplify 
Cherney's thinking about his own photography: 
Though the feel of my work leads to associations with 
the vocabulary of classical Chinese painting, there is 
still an important distinction: What is being seen in a 
photograph is indeed light as it existed for a moment 
in the physical world. This allows for a feeling of 
connectedness between the viewer and the essence of 
the physical world. 
(ibid.). 
Chang has responded to this intense physicality with 
a fantastic image, lightly touched with colour, in 
which the illuminated mountain bursts into flames. 
To the subject offorest fire-a rare one in Chinese 
art history-he brings the spontaneous and loosely 
executed brushwork characteristic of his landscape 
painting of recent years. He has long been a believer 
in the comprehensibility of Chinese painting in 
the context of abstract expressionism, and the 
textural quality of his seemingly relaxed brushwork 
in Mountain Fire may be seen as a reflection of an 
intuitive and extraordinarily self-expressive urge in 
Fig. 6 Mountain Fire 
By Arnold Chang (b. ~954) and Michael Cherney (b. 969 , 20n 
Ink painting and photographic pri nt on paper, U2 x 60 cm 
Private Collection 
Orientations I Vol ume 49 Number 2 I MARCH/APR IL 2018 
224 
his work of the past 7 or 8 years . For a commission 
exhibited at the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston in 
20~O, for example, he chose to pair his work with a 
drip painting by Jackson Pollock (~9~2-56) that was 
displayed flat, as though in a handscroll case (Fig. 
7) (Hao, 20~O, p. 20). In his choice of Pollock, Chang 
made an implicit suggestion that the best painting 
in the literati manner might correspond to the selfexpression found in 20th century modernism . Since 
the beginning of the Chang-Cherney collaboration, 
however, the duo has pushed into 21st century 
concerns. 
The indexicality ofthe photographs that 
Cherney prints, despite their radical cropping and 
the controlled transformations caused by greatly 
enlarging the images, may suggest the specificity 
and detail found in the writings of landscapist Guo 
Xi (after ~ooo-c. ~090), from a period when creating 
a persuasive image of the physical world was highly 
prized : 
A mountain without haze and cloud s is like spring 
without flowers and gra ss. If a mountain is without 
clouds, it is not refined; without water it is not charming. 
Without paths it is not living; without fore sts it is not 
growing. Without deep distance it seems shallow; 
without level distance it does not re cede and without 
high distance it stays low. 
(G uo Xi, Linquan gaozhi [L ofty Record of Forest and 
TreesJ, trans. John Hay, in Bush and Shih, 1985, p. 168) 
Fig. 7 Brushwork Study for Reorienting Pollock 
By Arno ld Cha ng (b. 1954), 2008 
Handscro ll, ink on paper, 48.3 x 187. 3 cm 
Privat e Collection 
Chang's artistic method, on the other hand, brings 
forth landscapes that only exist in his imagination. 
As the late Ming master Dong Oichang (~555-~636) 
wrote: 
From the standpoint of splendid scenery, painting 
cannot equal [realJlandscape, but from t he standpoint 
of the sheer marvels of brush and ink, [realJlandscape is 
not at all the equal of painting. 
(Dong Qichang, Hu azhi [Th e Meaning of PaintingJ, in 
Cahill, 1982, p. 122) 
Athough the class of Chinese literati-men with 
a common classical education and aspirations to 
fulfil the duties ofthe imperial scholar-officialceased to exist after the fall of the Oing empire 
(~644-~911) a century ago, some of their cultural 
values remain compelling in the contemporary 
world. One of the fundamental principles of literati 
painting is that the work of art reveals the character 
and accomplishments of its ma ker. In this ideal, the 
virtues of the artist, namely his knowledge, intellect, 
philosophy, instincts and training, would appear on 
the paper, and through their traces would enable 
those who saw the pa inting to mentally follow them 
back to their source in the mind of the artist. In 
Chang's brushwork all of these things, as well as the 
purit y with which he has pursued his passion for the 
history and practice of Chinese painting, are indeed 
exposed. Cherney, whose photographic process takes 
Fig . 8 After Huang Gongwang #6 
By Arnold Chang (b. 1954) and Michael Cherney (b. 1969), 2014 
Ink painting and photographic print on paper, 60 x 112 cm 
Private Collection 
him out of his peaceful Beijing studio to the edges 
of snow-sprinkled precipices in all parts of China, 
demonstrates the literati virtue of 'reading ~o,ooo 
books and travelling ~o,ooo miles' (Fig. 8). These two 
artists, working in quite different ways, challenge 
the boundaries oftheir respective media, techniques 
and concepts. Despite their differences, both 
artists-separately, and in collaboration-achieve 
• e ca lm and elegance of the literati aesthetic in an 
extraordinary contemporary form . 
Julia F. Andrews is distinguished university professor in the 
Department of History of Art at The Ohio State University. 
Kuiyi Shen is professor of art history, theory, and criticism 
and director of the PhD programme in the Department of 
Visual Arts at the University of California, San Diego. 
The collaborative works discussed in this article will 
be on view in the exhibition 'From Two Arises Three: 
The Collaborative Works of Arnold Chang and Michael 
Cherney' at the University Museum and Art Gallery of The 
University of Hong Kong from 2 March to 6 May 2018. 
Selected bibliography 
Susan Bush and Hsio-yen Shih, Early Chinese Texts on 
Painting, Cambridge, MA, 1985. 
James Cahill, The Distant Mountains: Chinese Painting 
of the Late Ming Dynasty, 1570-1644, New York and 
Tokyo, 1982. 
From 2 Arises 3: The Collaborative Works of Arnold Chang 
and Michael Cherney, 2009-201 4, New York, 2014. 
Fu Qiumeng Fine Art, 'Interview w ith Arnold Chang', 
directed and produced by Eva Chen, <vimeo. 
com/206701602>, 2016. 
Hao Sheng, 'Ten Takes on Chinese Tradit ion', in Hao 
Sheng, Fresh Ink: Ten Takes on Chinese Tradition, 
Bo~on, 2010, pp . 11-27. 
Stephanie H. Tung, 'Engaging with Tradition: A 
Conversation w ith Michael Cherney', Local Culture/ 
Global Photography 3, no. 2 (spring 2003), <hdl. 
han die. net/2027 /s po . 7977573.0003.206>. 
